The Project Gutenberg eBook of The summers readers, by Maud Summers

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you
will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before
using this eBook.

Title: The summers readers
       Manual, first lessons in reading

Author: Maud Summers

Release Date: December 31, 2022 [eBook #69672]

Language: English

Produced by: hekula03, Jwala Kumar Sista and the Online Distributed
             Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This book was
             produced from images made available by the HathiTrust
             Digital Library.)

*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SUMMERS READERS ***


                         Transcriber's Notes

 1. Cover-page modified by the transcriber.

 2. Typographical errors and hyphenation inconsistencies were silently
    corrected.

 3. The text version is coded for italics and other mark-ups i.e.,
    (a) Italics/Underline are indicated thus _italic_;
    (b) Bold are indicated thus =Bold=;
    (c) Smallcaps thus +Caps+; and
    (d) Images are indicated as [Illustration: (with narration...)]

                  *       *       *       *       *




                        _THE SUMMERS READERS_

                               MANUAL
                      FIRST LESSONS IN READING

                                 BY
                            MAUD SUMMERS

                [Illustration: Copyright-company-logo]

                    FRANK D. BEATTYS AND COMPANY
                              NEW YORK




                         Copyright, 1908, by
                    +FRANK D. BEATTYS AND COMPANY
                              NEW YORK+


                         THE DE VINNE PRESS




                              CONTENTS.


 Chapter                                                          Page

                              +PART I.+

 LEARNING TO READ                                                    3

     1. The Fundamental Principles in Learning to Read.

     2. Elements of Reading:

         (a) The Thought Element.

         (b) The Symbol Element.

         (c) The Phonic Element.

     3. Methods of Teaching Reading.

     4. Summary.


                             +PART II.+

 FIRST HALF YEAR: FIRST STEP                                        21

     1. Ear Training Exercises.

     2. Preliminary Blackboard Lessons.


                             +PART III.+

 FIRST HALF YEAR: SECOND STEP                                       49

     1. Blackboard Lessons and Primer.

     2. Phonic Lessons:

         (a) The Consonant Sounds.

         (b) Phonograms derived from Words used
         in the Primer.

         (c) Word Drill.


                             +PART IV.+

 SECOND HALF YEAR: THIRD STEP                                       75

     1. Reading from the First Reader.

     2. Phonic Lessons:

         (a) The Vowel Sounds.

         (b) Equivalent Vowel Sounds.

         (c) Word Drill.


                              +PART V.+

 THIRD HALF YEAR: FOURTH STEP                                       99

     1. Reading from the Second Reader.

     2. Phonic Lessons:

         (a) Initial and Final Syllables taught as
         Phonograms.

         (b) Word Drill.

     3. Later Work.

                  *       *       *       *       *

 CONSONANT SOUNDS                                                   112

 VOWEL SOUNDS                                                       113




                              PREFACE.


The Summers series of Readers consists of a Primer, a First Reader,
and a Second Reader, closely articulated for the purpose of teaching
beginners to read, and a Manual of Instruction intended to give
teachers a full knowledge of the elements involved in the process
of learning to read, and definite, practical guidance for daily
classroom work.

The whole purpose and essence of reading is the communication of
ideas. It is the thought--the impression--rather than the form--the
expression--which gives value to what is read. With this fact in mind
the subject-matter has been chosen with special reference to primal
social activities in history and contemporaneous society significant
of the race development, as the securing of food, shelter, and
clothing. But this subject-matter must touch the child personally if
it is to be of value in learning to read. It must appear for him in
the form of action, rhythm, stories, observation, plays and games, if
the symbols of reading are to be fraught with meaning for him. What
is of interest to the child, and what is of value to society, have
both been kept in mind in selecting and arranging the literature of
childhood used in this series of readers.

This Manual of Instruction provides for three half years of work.
Foreign children, or those of slower development, will require a
longer time. In that event, the lessons in the Manual will suggest
the _order_, not the time.

In learning to read, two lines of work are to be developed at
separate periods each day. Reading lessons and Phonic lessons in
orderly sequence are given in the Manual of Instruction.

Helpful suggestions for this series of readers have come from many
sources. The author wishes to acknowledge especial indebtedness to
Edgar Dubs Shimer, Ph.D., District Superintendent, New York City, for
valuable criticism; to Grant Karr, Ph.D., Teacher of the Principles
of Education and Director of Observation in the Training School for
Teachers, New York City, for suggestions concerning the statement
of the unity of language; to Miss Alice H. Damon, A.B., Supervising
Principal of the Primary Department, State Normal School, Potsdam,
N. Y., for assistance in preparing the Manual of Instruction;
and to Miss Caroline A. Yale, Ph.D., Principal of Clarke School,
Northampton, Mass., for the use of the chart of consonant sounds.




                              +PART I.+

                          LEARNING TO READ.


    1. The Fundamental Principles in Learning to Read.
    2. Elements of Reading:
              (a) The Thought Element.
              (b) The Symbol Element.
              (c) The Phonic Element.
    3. Methods of Teaching Reading.
    4. Summary.


                                 1.

                     THE FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES
                        IN LEARNING TO READ.


=Language Defined.= Language is the conventional means by which man
communicates his thoughts. It is a complex unity composed of thought
and symbol, spoken or written. Because it is the means by which
different minds are identified in thought, it becomes an essential
factor in social organization.

=Symbolism.= In a wider sense all means of social communication,
material and pictorial expressions, as well as spoken and written
words, may be called language. Thought, through symbol, to thought,
is the whole social process of language, spoken and written, for
every meaning has a symbol and every symbol has a meaning.

=The Problem in Learning to Read.= The problem in teaching reading
is to bring the symbol and its meaning into vital unity in the mind
of the learner. Hence it is necessary that the teacher distinguish
clearly between these elements. When the thought and the symbol have
become so united that each is essential to the other, the problem of
learning to read has been solved.

=Fundamental Principles.= There are three chief fundamental
principles involved in the process of learning to read, namely:

 _First. Images._ The thought aspect of language depends upon clear
 and vivid images. This is so important that unless children have
 such images they cannot master the symbols which represent them. One
 purpose of nature study, handicraft, and art is to give children
 these images.

 _Second. Wholes to Parts._ In acquiring knowledge the mind moves from
 the vague whole to the parts and then back again to the clarified
 whole. An understanding of the parts gives a fuller meaning to the
 whole. The mind analyzes in order to reach a better synthesis. When
 we wish to make known to a child a coat, for instance, we do not show
 him separately the sleeves, the lapels, the pockets, the buttons. We
 hold up the whole garment and say, "Here is a coat." It is necessary
 to do the same in teaching reading. Give the child first an image of
 the whole situation which he is to think himself into, and then come
 to the details to make the whole clear.

 _Third. Self-Activity._ The child is an active, creative agent,
 vitally concerned in adjusting himself to his physical and spiritual
 environment. Self-activity manifests itself in some external form,
 which in language is the symbol of the self-active thought. Success
 in teaching reading depends upon the amount of self-active response
 the symbol awakens in the thought of the child.

These three fundamental principles, namely, clear and vivid images,
whole situations, and self-activity in the form of response and
interest on the part of the child, should be kept in the foreground
in teaching reading.


                                 2.

                    ELEMENTS IN LEARNING TO READ.


Since language is composed of thought, symbol, and sound, the main
elements to be considered in learning to read are the thought, the
symbol, and the phonic elements.


                        THE THOUGHT ELEMENT.

=The Purpose of the Thought Element.= The problem of elementary
reading is to establish a permanent association between the written
or the printed symbols and the thoughts which they represent. The
thought is all-important; it is the vitalizing element in learning to
read. In learning to talk the child associates the meaning with the
spoken symbol; in learning to read he associates a thought content
with a sight symbol. The strength of the association depends in each
case upon the worth the thought has for the child; hence the great
necessity of giving especial attention to the thought element in
learning to read.

=Action Sentences.= A sentence is the unit of language and the
life-giving factor in the process of learning to read. It is
important, therefore, that in the beginning the child should form
the habit of grasping sentences. In the first reading lessons it is
necessary to find subjects which interest the child and furnish clear
mental pictures. Children are interested in actions. They like to
move and will read for the purpose of performing an action. Action
sentences appeal to all children, because that which a child does
makes a deep impression and involves large self-activity.

=Nursery Rhymes.= Children are so influenced by rhythm that it is
impossible to train them aright without giving due consideration
to this form of expression. There are many interesting complete
rhymes and poems that are valuable for reading lessons. In content
the poetry of childhood should contain familiar images, tinged with
enough of mystery to give that subtle mingling of sense and nonsense
which stirs the imagination of the child and also relates him to the
actual world in which he lives. The Mother Goose melodies fulfil
these conditions, but it is the rhythm far more than the thought that
attracts the child. Have the children learn the rhymes by ear and
recite them with no thought other than that they are to be enjoyed.
Incidentally, they will afford valuable exercise in pronunciation,
articulation, and tone modulation, if the teacher is careful
about these matters, for children are great imitators. Later the
children will read these rhymes and poems with great pleasure, thus
associating a valuable thought content with its printed symbol in a
way that will make the association abiding.

=Stories.= Children express in action, and ultimately in character,
the influences which they receive from stories. Therefore, stories
containing true and good ideals should be selected. Children
appreciate and love what appeals to the best and the highest in
them. Nursery rhymes, fables, fairy lore, and classic myth should
be used. They have nourished the race, and will also feed the soul
life of the individual child. The outer form varies with the age and
the country, but the inner meaning is of the spirit and will outlast
the centuries. Every teacher should, therefore, carefully cultivate
the art of story-telling. It is far better to present a story orally
than to read it from a book. If it is told, the teacher can adapt it
to the needs of her classes, and by the magnetism of voice, eye, and
personality awaken an abiding love for good literature. At a later
period the child will enjoy reading these same stories in the reading
books of the first and second grades.

=Observation Lessons.= Observation and description should precede
reading in the early lessons. The teacher may write on the blackboard
simple sentences based upon these observations and descriptions.
Anything in the environment of the home or the school which interests
the child should be utilized. Encourage the children to observe their
household pets and to tell the other children about them. Whatever
the child makes in the time devoted to handicraft, or observes in
the nature lessons, or plays in the recreation period may be used as
material for reading lessons. Color is so intimately connected with
the emotional life that its value and importance should be recognized.


                         THE SYMBOL ELEMENT.

=Use.= All thought which rises to the plane of self-consciousness
is communicated by means of a material, a pictorial, or a lingual
symbol. The thought element and the symbol element are two sides of
the same thing, namely, language. They form the _impression_ and
_expression_ of language, and hence of social communication and
identity.

=Kinds of Symbols.= There are two kinds of symbols which must be
mastered in learning to read, namely, the vocal and the graphic,
appealing respectively to the ear and to the eye. These symbols are
made by the voice and the hand, and are recognized by the ear and the
eye. They must always be regarded in the light of that which they
represent in connection with elementary reading, whether used in
receiving or expressing thought. This thought must be kept clearly
in mind in silent and oral reading, in word repetition, and in word
drill. It will aid also in the spelling and the phonic work of the
children.

                          THE PHONIC ELEMENT.

=Definition.= The phonic element deals with articulate sounds and the
letters or the symbols which represent them. Here, as elsewhere in
learning to read, the unity between meaning and symbol--impression
and expression--must be kept clearly in mind. The spoken symbol
implies training in pronunciation, enunciation, articulation,
inflection, and all that makes for clear understanding and agreeable
oral expression of thought. Ear and voice, eye and hand, are tools
which must be trained to work with automatic perfection as the means
in communicating thought.

=Purpose.= The purpose of the phonic lesson is the association of a
sound with its written or printed symbol, so that the child will be
able to get and to express the sound when the symbol is presented to
him. The sight symbol and the sound symbol should be so thoroughly
associated that immediately upon the presentation of either one of
them the other will appear in consciousness.

=Ear and Voice Training.= It is of the utmost importance that
children be given a broad experience with sound in the way of ear
and voice training exercises for a few weeks before the formal study
of phonics is begun. These exercises may be carried on in connection
with the thought development in learning to read and in the music
work. In the nature work the children should be trained to listen to
bird note, insect hum, and other sounds of nature. Story-telling is
most helpful in this ear training. It should begin in the first grade
and continue through the entire elementary school period. The reading
of poems aloud should be a regular part of the school program, not
only to stimulate the imagination, but also to give the enjoyment
that comes from the cadence of rhythmic language and to train the
ear to make fine discriminations. Ear training and voice culture are
so intimately related that it is impossible to cultivate one without
cultivating the other, for they sustain to each other the vital
relation of impression and expression.

=Phonic Facts.= The question of the exact number of elementary
sounds in the English language is still unsettled. This Manual is
based on the belief that there are forty-five elementary sounds in
the English language, twenty vowel sounds and twenty-five consonant
sounds. The difficulty in mastering the phonic element in learning
to read English is greatly increased because some of the elementary
sounds are represented by two letters, as _th_ in _thin_, _ea_ in
_head_; and some sounds are represented by two or more symbols,
as _e_ in _her_, _u_ in _turn_, and _i_ in _firm_. It is neither
necessary nor desirable that little children should learn all the
equivalent symbols; nor is it considered wise to give to children all
of the forty-five elementary sounds. Forty is the number taught in
the phonic lessons of this Manual. Use has determined the order of
presentation.

 1. _Vowel Sounds._ The vowels are always pure sound. They express
 the emotions and are the rhythmic, musical element which gives
 language its beauty. There are many equivalent spellings for the
 twenty elementary vowel sounds in the English language. Those most
 frequently used are found on page 113; the others will be learned
 unconsciously as the child develops. See page 113 for a scientific
 arrangement of the vowel sounds.

 2. _Consonant Sounds._ The consonants limit and define sound. Of the
 twenty-five elementary consonant sounds, ten have no vocal quality
 whatever. They are commonly known as breath sounds--_f, h, k, p,
 s, t, ch, sh, th, wh_. With the exception of _h_, every one of
 these breath sounds has its corresponding vocal sound:

                    f     vocalized becomes v

                    p         "         "   b

                    t         "         "   d

                    th (thin) "         "   th (then)

                    wh        "         "   w

                    k         "         "   g

                    s         "         "   z

                    ch        "         "   j

                    sh        "         "   zh

See p. 112 for a scientific arrangement of the consonant sounds.

 3. _Phonograms_. In all the phonic lessons used in this Manual a
 _phonogram is the symbol of a sound group_, usually composed of
 a single vowel sound combined with a single consonant sound. For
 example, _ing_ in _s-ing_ is a phonogram, but in _see-ing_ it is a
 syllable.

=Diacritical Marks.= Useless phonograms are a burden rather than a
help; therefore the child should learn only those which he actually
uses. For this reason it is not advisable to use diacritical marks
during the earlier stages of learning to read. They make the symbol
complex and cumbersome, and at the same time their need and great
value do not become apparent until the child begins to use the
dictionary, say, in the fourth school year. In the earlier stages
of learning to read, symbols acquire meaning by being constantly
associated with their respective sounds and thoughts. Habits of
pronunciation are formed by always attaching the same sound values
to letters and groups of letters. When a child forms an image of a
word burdened with diacritical marks, he must later form an image
of the word without these. When children are taught to look for
diacritical marks their imaging power is centered upon the markings
of the words instead of the thoughts for which these words stand;
hence it takes longer to get the thought, and as a consequence they
are apt to be slow readers. Rapid readers are usually thoughtful
readers, because they have the power to grasp quickly a large number
of words and to interpret them in mental pictures.

=Phonic Drill.= Phonic drill and reading are distinct processes and
should be taught at different periods of the day during the first
two years of school. The purpose of the elementary reading lesson is
to associate permanently the thought and the symbols which represent
it, so that the thought can be gained from the written or printed
language. The purpose of the elementary phonic lesson is to associate
permanently sounds and the characters which represent them, so that
new words can be readily recognized. Both processes are necessary
in teaching reading, but phonic lessons should be relegated to a
subsidiary place so that they may not become an impediment to the
main purpose.

=Phonic Method.= In the phonic method sight words are analyzed
into their elements, which are then combined in new relations to
form new words. These new combinations of familiar elements in new
relations are recognized again and again, until the association
grows permanent, and so new words are acquired. Consonant sounds are
recognized as initial, final, and medial. Next the phonogram element
is analyzed into its vowel and consonant sounds. By means of familiar
symbols the child has the power to pronounce new words. A knowledge
of individual symbols is the foundation upon which the sight
recognition of words rests; hence the necessity of rapid and varied
drills.

The method suggested in this Manual for phonic lessons is as follows:

 1. Separate sight words into their consonant sounds and phonograms.

 2. Separate phonograms into their consonant and vowel sounds.

 3. Associate these sound elements with their symbols.

 4. Combine the sound elements to form new words (Phonic Synthesis).

 5. Teach initial and final syllables as phonograms.


                                 3.

                    METHODS OF TEACHING READING.

Methods of learning to read are the result of bringing the different
thought, symbol, and phonic elements into combination and active
co-operation. The process is organic and all these features must be
kept in mind. There are two kinds of reading, silent and oral.

=Silent Reading.= Silent reading is the personal, individual way of
getting thought from the printed page. The teacher must lead the
pupil to see that the sentences have meaning. From the very first the
teacher should never lose sight of this fundamental principle and
should train the child into the habit of interpreting the printed
page into mental pictures. A good method of conducting the reading
lesson is the following:

Let each child read the entire lesson silently to get the thought
(whole to parts). When the child does not recognize a word and
cannot get it from the context or the sound elements, tell him what
it is, in as simple a way as he would be told about a new object in
the home. When he has finished reading the child may show that he
is ready to give the thought. The teacher requests a pupil to give
in his own language what he has just read. It will then be seen
how vivid his images are of what he has read and how fully it has
appealed to him. At the same time, his expressing it in his own words
will exercise his self-activity. It is not wise in the beginning to
correct imperfect language to any great extent, for the reason that
the child's attention is liable to be diverted from the main thought
to some detail of the medium of expression. This is disastrous and
will tend to make him unnatural in both his thinking and feeling. It
destroys his appreciation for the whole, blurs his images, and takes
away the chief motive for reading.

In learning to read the child begins with the image of some story,
which he particularizes and clarifies by the thoughts in the
sentences and the ideas in the words. He masters the word elements in
this way, as a unity of meaning and symbol, which gives significance
to the sentence and to the story as a whole. Thus the power of
getting thought from the printed page develops.

=Oral Reading.= Oral reading is the process of interpreting thought
from the printed page and imparting it to another by means of
the voice. Silent reading should always precede oral reading, so
that the child may get the thought before he attempts to give it.
Silent reading is the power to translate the words into thoughts or
emotions. Oral reading goes a step further and gives these thoughts
and emotions audible expression and awakens them in another. Silent
reading is a necessity; oral reading is an accomplishment. Oral
reading is another way of telling a story. It implies the ability
to awaken one's thoughts in another's mind. It lacks the freedom of
expression usual in story-telling, for it demands power to interpret
and transmit thought almost simultaneously.

There are many ways of conducting an oral reading lesson. Two methods
are given for illustration:

                                 _A_

    1. The development of new words.
    2. The silent reading of the complete story.
    3. Oral reproduction of the complete story.
    4. Oral reading of the complete story.

                                 _B_

    1. The development of new words.
    2. Silent reading of paragraphs.
    3. Oral reproduction of paragraphs.
    4. Oral reading of paragraphs, then of the whole.

These methods differ only in the breadth and scope of the image of
the whole that the child is to think through at one time.

Freedom of expression usually accompanies the reading of interesting
thought. The child will usually use natural, clear tones in reading,
as he does in talking, if he understands what he reads. Many children
read poorly because they neither understand nor feel any meaning in
the words. Both gesture and language will be spontaneous if prompted
by right thinking and right feeling. The dramatic presentation of a
story, however crude, becomes a great aid.

=Word Repetition.= Many repetitions of words, phrases, and sentences
are necessary in mastering the symbol. It is quite possible to have
a repetition of words with an ever-changing variety in valuable
thought. This variety holds the interest of the children and at
the same time accustoms the eye to the repeated symbol. The symbol
elements in the action sentences, observation lessons, nursery
rhymes, and stories must be repeated many times, but, to preserve
interest in them and to increase their meaning, the greatest care
must be taken in the selection and the presentation of the thought
element. If the teacher of elementary reading can master this part of
her work, her success is well-nigh assured.


                              SPELLING.

=Notion and Purpose.= Spelling is a finer analysis of the process of
learning to read and hence involves all the elements of learning to
read. The problem in learning to spell is to associate permanently
the smallest symbols of the word, the letters, oral and written,
with their appropriate meanings. In oral spelling the impression is
received through the ear; the expression is by means of the voice.
In written spelling the impression is received through the eye; the
expression is by means of the hand. Because written spelling occupies
a much larger place in life through the need of communicating ideas
by means of writing, it should receive more attention in language
teaching than oral spelling. The training of the eye and the hand
is, therefore, more important in learning to spell than the training
of the ear and the voice, although oral spelling sometimes helps by
bringing in the auditory and the vocal memory to assist the visual
and the manual. In the beginning children should learn to spell by
_writing_, not as a drill in penmanship, but for the purpose of
calling attention to the form of the word.

=Elements.= Spelling is a complex and difficult art and requires (a)
training in elementary sounds and their symbols, or phonic drill;
(b) training of eye and hand in forming the letters of a word, or
written spelling; (c) training of ear and voice in naming the letters
of a word, or oral spelling. Sound, form, and name of letters must be
inseparably associated, so that they will become necessary elements
in the vital combination of symbol and meaning in the word.

=Method.= In the method pursued the teacher writes _Sing._, for
instance, upon the blackboard, with capital letter and period to
indicate that it is the expression of a complete thought. The teacher
then erases the word and requests the children to write it. Review
this word at the next lesson and add a new one. Next the teacher
writes _I can sing. Can you sing?_, and similar sentences, upon the
blackboard, and proceeds in the same manner. As the work progresses
the children should image a new sentence at each lesson, and in
addition should be able to write from dictation several review
sentences. In the early lessons the children should write at the
blackboard, or use unruled paper and soft lead pencils with dull
points. A clear image of the symbol will aid the child in writing it.
This makes it essential that the teacher write a legible hand.

=Word Drill.= Drill upon the words learned is necessary to mechanize
ear, voice, eye, and hand in the reading process so that the child
may be left free to attend to the subject-matter. Have the children
pronounce, write, and spell the unfamiliar words found in the reading
lesson. Insist upon exact pronunciation and a natural, pleasing
modulation of the voice. Later the children should use these same
words in spoken and written sentences. After children have learned
the names of the letters, both oral and written spelling should be
used, since they are correlative processes. Oral spelling often
deepens the impression and makes the image more permanent.


                            THE ALPHABET.

The alphabet should be taught in serial order, because of its use in
reading card catalogs, dictionaries, etc. The alphabet characters
have been learned in the phonic drill by associating the sounds
with the letters as the children require them to master words, but
not consecutively. The A B C's, however, in their old-fashioned
significance, should be a part of the child's knowledge when he
enters the second grade.


                              SUMMARY.

In the process of learning to read, certain elements are brought
together and associated in vital organic unity in accordance with
broad general principles. These the teacher must keep constantly
in mind if she is to succeed. Reading, like all language, is a
combination of thought and symbol. The thought gives the meaning
and is the _reason_ for reading, while the symbol is only the tool
and instrument of the thought. Care must be taken to see (a) that
the child forms clear images of what he is reading; and (b) that he
obeys the fundamental law of mind of proceeding from wholes to parts.
By holding these principles in full view and giving the thought
element the leading place, the symbol and phonic elements will fall
into their proper place in accomplishing the purpose of elementary
reading, namely, the association of the symbol and its meaning in a
vital unity.




                             +PART II.+

                          FIRST HALF YEAR:
                             FIRST STEP.


Two lines of work are to be developed at separate periods each day.

    1. Ear Training Exercises.
    2. Preliminary Blackboard Lessons.


                       EAR TRAINING EXERCISES.

=Directions.= 1. The purpose of ear training is to familiarize the
child with the elementary sounds in the language, so that he may have
accurate sound images before associating them with the corresponding
symbols.

2. Give the sounds of the letters, not the names. Teach the
letter-names later in the Phonic Lessons. Give the sounds softly but
distinctly. A loud, harsh voice makes purity of sound impossible.

3. Cultivate the attentive ear in children. Teach them to hear, and
then to image, the song of the birds, the patter of the rain, the
sound of the wind, the hum of the bee, the puff of the locomotive and
other familiar sounds.

4. The rhymes and poems are suggestive, not final. The teacher may
choose others if they better meet her need. Those selected from song
literature have a tone quality that will interest children and prove
helpful in training the ear. Read the poems aloud in a well modulated
voice, with clear articulation, that the children may become
sensitive to the beauty of the human voice.

5. Ear training should precede the formal study of phonics for a few
weeks. The exact time required cannot be arbitrarily named, because
it depends not only upon the ability of the class but also upon the
teaching power of the one in charge. From six to eight weeks, with
daily periods ten or fifteen minutes in length, will accomplish good
results.

                                 I.

Consonant sounds are taught by phonic analysis of words, and not
by any artificial device. Ear training exercises are helpful as a
preparation for this work. Let the first sounding be done _by the
teacher_ and have the children perform the actions as she slightly
separates the sound elements. In this way the ear soon becomes
accustomed to the formation of words from their phonic elements.
_Ex.:_

    John may r-un.
    Mary may j-ump.
    You may h-op, Frank.

                  *       *       *       *       *

    Mary may bring me a b-ook.
    John may put the b-ook on the t-able.
    William, please bring the fl-ag.
    Frank may wave the fl-ag.

_Caution._ There should be no abruptness about such an exercise.
The slight separation and the gentle prolonging are sufficient to
keep the children listening and interested. Avoid giving to separate
consonants, sounds which they do not possess.

                                 II.

=Slow Pronunciation of Names.= Children are interested in their own
names; if they pronounce these slowly they will begin to distinguish
sounds. The teacher first pronounces her own name as the children
watch, making prominent the initial sound. She then calls upon
different children to pronounce their names. _Ex.:_ A child named
Mary says: "My name is M-ary," emphasizing the sound "M." Another
says, "My name is R-obert," emphasizing the sound "R," etc.

                                III.

=Singing Games.= The old-fashioned singing games, such as "Here We Go
Round the Mulberry Bush," "London Bridge," "Looby Loo," etc., will
delight the children and are excellent exercises for ear training.
(See _Folk Songs and Games_ by Marie Ruef Hofer.)

                                 IV.

=Phonic Game.= _What is it?_ A child acts as leader and stands in the
front of the room. The children in their seats question him until the
supply of rhymes is exhausted. _Ex.:_

    Leader: I'm thinking of something that rhymes with _top_.
        Child: Is it chop?
        Leader: It is not chop.
        Child: Is it hop?
        Leader: It is hop.

_Object_. Grouping of words with like phonograms and final consonants.

                                 V.

=Phonic Game.= _Guess._ Ask a child to leave the room. Children
in their seats choose a word. When the child returns he either acts
out the word he has in mind or describes it. _Ex.:_

                              _Action._

We are thinking of something that rhymes with _bat_.

        Is it this? (Child guessing puts on a hat.)
        No. It is not hat.
        Is it this? (Child guessing pats his head.)
        No. It is not pat.
        Is it this? (Child guessing says _Meow_.)
        Yes. It is cat.
                  Is it a pretty color?
                  It is not red.
                  Is it something we sleep in?
                  It is not bed.
                  Is it a boy's name?
                  Yes. It is Ned.

                                 VI.

=Phonic Game.= _Hide and Seek._ Teacher gives the first rhyme.
She then calls upon a child to give a rhyme using the same initial
letter. This child then calls upon another child. Continue in this
way until the rhymes are exhausted. _Ex.:_

                  I am in _run_.
                  I am not in _Sun_.

                  I am in _rug_.
                  I am not in _bug_.

                  I am in _rose_.
                  I am not in _nose_.

_Object_--Grouping of words with like initial consonants.

_Caution_--Be careful to articulate the initial and final consonants
distinctly.


                     A LIST OF RHYMES AND POEMS.

The teacher may read the following rhymes and poems to the
children in connection with the Ear Training Exercises.

 +THE MELODIES OF MOTHER GOOSE.+

     Three Little Kittens.
     Hey, Diddle, Diddle.
     Baa, Baa, Black Sheep.
     Peter Piper.
     One, Two, Buckle My Shoe.
     I Saw a Ship a-sailing.

 +SONG LITERATURE FROM THE+ _Modern Music Primer_.

     The Fireman             Frederick Manley.
     The Journey's End          "       "
     The Humming Bird           "       "
     The Reason Why             "       "
     The Woodpecker             "       "

 +SONG LITERATURE FROM+ _Small Songs for Small Singers_.

     Mr. Duck and Mr. Turkey            W. H. Neidlinger.
     Tiddledy-winks and Tiddledy-wee      "        "
     Tick-Tock                            "        "

 "The Drum," by Eugene Field.
         _Book: "Poems of Childhood."_

 "Who Stole the Bird's Nest?" by Lydia Maria Child.
         _Book: "Child Life," (Selections) John G. Whittier (Ed.)._

 "Robert of Lincoln," by William Cullen Bryant.
         _Book: Whittier's "Child Life."_

 "The Clucking Hen," from _"Aunt Effie's Rhymes."_
          _Book: Whittier's "Child Life."_


                   PRELIMINARY BLACKBOARD LESSONS.

                     (Time, about eight weeks.)

=Directions.=1. This Manual contains thirty Preliminary Blackboard
Lessons. The purpose is to associate thought and symbol. These
preliminary lessons anticipate the first twenty-nine pages in the
Primer but do not exactly reproduce the text. By means of the
blackboard work the pupil accumulates a small initial vocabulary
which enables him to read the lessons in the Primer with no fear or
uncertainty of the text.

2. There is no exact limit to the number of Preliminary Blackboard
Lessons that should be taught. Those given in the Manual indicate the
order of development, not the time. American children will master
the lessons given in from six to eight weeks. Foreign children will
require a little more time, since they must learn to associate
thought with both the spoken and the written symbol. When children
read lessons written on the blackboard with ease, put the Primer in
their hands.


                                 I.

The teacher writes the action sentence _Run._ on the blackboard in a
clear, distinct hand. The initial capital and the period at the end
are consistently used, so that from the beginning the children are
accustomed to them. After writing the word the teacher expresses the
action by running. If her dignity will not permit her to do this,
she may bring in a child from the second or third grade and ask him
to perform whatever action is indicated by the word written upon the
board. The word is not spoken at this time; the child discovers
the meaning from the action. The whole purpose of the teacher is
to associate the thought expressed by the action with its written
symbol. Let this word remain on the board; write it in a larger
hand near the place where the word was first written. Again let the
teacher or child perform the act. Select another board; write the
word in a smaller hand. Again express the thought in action. The
class will watch this with deep interest. Some member of the class
will soon associate the written word with the action, and will stand
upon the first round of the ladder leading to the interpretation of
thought from written symbols.

The reason for writing the word in a larger and a smaller hand, and
especially in different places on the blackboard, is to prevent
local association. Then, too, the change of place will intensify the
child's interest and attention.

Make the reading lesson short and repeat it at intervals during the
day. If fifteen minutes is the time set apart for reading, divide
this into three five-minute periods. The lesson period should be
lengthened as the work advances.

               II.               III.                 IV.

On each succeeding day, and in the same manner, teach

                                 Hop.
                                 Jump.
                                 Sing.

Teach one word a day and review those previously taught. Write the
words on the blackboard a number of times arranged irregularly, and
have frequent short drills upon them.

These four verbs, _Run_, _Hop_, _Jump_, and _Sing_, have been found
by practical experience to be very good ones for the beginning
lessons. They will occur again and again in the later stories about
animals and pets. They are also used in the stories about the plays
and games which children delight to reproduce in the reading lesson.

                                 V.

                               REVIEW.

Three methods of presenting a reading lesson are suggested:

                                 _A_

    1. The teacher writes an action word on the blackboard.

    2. The teacher asks a child to perform the action.

    3. The child looks at the blackboard and reads the word.
(This is the beginning of oral reading.)

                                 _B_

    1. The teacher asks a child to perform any action he
    chooses.

    2. The teacher asks another child to tell what the first one
    did.

    3. The teacher writes the action word on the blackboard.

                                 _C_

    1. One child tells another what action to perform.

    2. The child performs the action.

    3. The teacher writes the word on the blackboard.

Many devices will suggest themselves to the progressive teacher
if she clearly understands that the purpose of the lesson is to
associate the thought with its written or printed symbol. If the
child, after observing a word written on the blackboard, expresses
the thought in action, he shows that he has read it.

                                 VI.

                               _and._

The teacher writes sentences like the following on the blackboard:

                        Run and jump.
                        Jump and run.
                        Run and hop.
                        Hop and run.
                        Run and jump and hop.
                        Jump and hop and run.

Endless combinations may be made with these words, giving constant
change of thought while repeating the words. It is quite possible in
this way to have word repetition with variety of thought.

Each time a sentence is written on the blackboard the process is as
follows:

    First:  Observe the words. (Silent reading.)
    Second: Express the thought in action.
    Third:  Pronounce the words. (Oral reading.)

Some children grasp the sentence form as unconsciously as they do
the word form. If they fail to do so, teach the use of the capital
letter.

Vary the lesson by introducing the names of children in the class,
thus:

                        Run and jump, Mary.
                        John, hop and jump.

                                VII.

                              _I can._

The phrase _I can_ is next introduced. Write upon the blackboard the
sentence _I can run_. Read it to the children. Have a child perform
the action and then read the sentence aloud. Proceed in this way with
other action sentences. Group the sentences in various ways and have
frequent reviews.

                        I can sing.
                        I can hop.
                        I can run and jump.
                        I can jump and hop.
                        I can hop, and run, and jump.

The reading process consists of three steps:

    First: Silent reading.
    Second: The thought expressed in action.
    Third: Oral reading.

After teaching the sentence as a whole, it should be analyzed into
words. For instance, ask a child to pass to the blackboard and point
to _I can_ as many times as he finds it written. Point to _run_, etc.
This may be varied by asking a child to underscore or erase the words
that are alike.

                                VIII.

                              _Rover_.

Household pets, anything and everything that is familiar to a child
and in which he is interested, will serve as material for reading
lessons. Rover is a universal name for a dog and hence is arbitrarily
used for illustrative purposes in these lessons. If Dash happens to
be a better name known to the child, use that. Sentences like the
following will suggest themselves:

                        Rover can run.
                        Rover can jump.
                        Rover can run and jump.
                        I can hop.
                        Rover and I can run.

                                 IX.

                              _Kitty_.

Kittens are a never failing source of interest to children. At
a suggestion from the teacher the children themselves will give
sentences like the following:

                        Kitty can jump.
                        Kitty can run.
                        Kitty and I can run.
                        Kitty and I can jump.
                        Kitty and Rover can run and jump.

The teacher writes these sentences upon the blackboard as they are
given to her by the different children. She then calls upon other
children to read them. A child may pretend that she is Kitty and
dramatize the action. This dramatic instinct is universal in children
and should be recognized throughout the school life.

                                 X.

                               _You._

The question form is easily learned and should be introduced in the
early lessons. Combine familiar words in new relations:

                        Can you run?
                        Can you sing?
                        You can jump.
                        Can Kitty hop?
                        Can you hop and sing?

                 XI. XII. XIII. XIV. XV. XVI. XVII.

Write upon the blackboard in a vertical row several _I see_
sentences. Have the children read them. Erase _I see_ in each
sentence, leaving _Rover_, _Kitty_, _you_. Again, place several _I
see_ sentences upon the blackboard. Erase _Rover_, _Kitty_, _you_,
leaving _I see_, _I see_, _I see_. Erase _I_, leaving the single word
_see_.

Continue in this way with the phrases _I can see_, _I have_, _I
like_, _I love_.

Children are interested in home life, therefore introduce the words
_father_, _mother_, _brother_, _sister_, _baby_ in the early lessons.

Teach the articles _a_, _an_, _the_ in connection with their nouns in
order to secure natural expression.

Review these words in new sentences which combine familiar words in
new relations. _Ex.:_

                  XI.                        XII.

               _I see._                  _I can see._

            I see Rover.            I can see Rover jump.
            I see Kitty.            I can see Kitty run.
            I see you.              I can see you run and jump.

                 XIII.                       XIV.

              _The bird._               _I have; a dog._

            Can you see the bird?   I have a bird.
            The bird can hop.       I have a dog.
            The bird can sing.      I have a kitty.
            The bird can jump.      Have you a bird?
            Can the bird jump?      Have you a kitty?
                                    Have you a dog?

                 XV.                     XVI.    XVII.

            _I like; to._        _I love; mother; father; baby_


            I like Rover.               I love Mother.
            I like Kitty.               I love Father.
            I like to sing.             I love you.
            I like to run.              Mother loves Baby.
            I like to see the bird hop. Baby loves Kitty.
            I like to see a dog jump.   I love Mother and Father.
            I like to see Rover run.

                               XVIII.

Children are interested in their own names, hence they will quickly
learn to associate the spoken name with its written symbol. Write
upon the blackboard the sentence, _Catch the ball_, ----. (Teacher,
supply the name of a child in the room.) Erase the name and replace
it with a different one. Continue in this way with other names. _Ex.:_

                        Catch the ball, John.
                        ----, catch the ball.
                        Roll the ball, ----.
                        Mary, roll the ball to ----.
                        ----, run to ----.
                        ----, hop to ----.

                                XIX.

From this time on it will add to the interest if the sentences are so
connected that they tell a story. The following method has been found
helpful:

Suppose a bird has been observed. The children have something to say
and this serves as material for a reading lesson. First one child and
then another expresses his thought about the bird. The teacher writes
the easiest of these sentences upon the blackboard, the result being
somewhat as follows:

                        I see a bird.
                        It is a blue bird.
                        The blue bird can sing.
                        The blue bird can hop.

The teacher asks the children to read silently the entire story. As
soon as each child is ready he may rise and turn his back to the
blackboard. He then gives the thought in his own language. _Ex.:_

                        I see a blue bird.
                        The blue bird can sing and hop.

Call upon different children to express the thought, and accept any
condensation of language which shows this power. The purpose in
asking the child to interpret the whole story in his own language is
to show that he has the _thought_.

The children are now ready to analyze the story into sentences. A
good device is to cover the story with a curtain provided for the
purpose. Raise the curtain and ask the children to observe, let us
say, the third sentence. Cover this and ask a child to give the exact
language. _Ex.:_

                        The blue bird can sing.

If he cannot do so, raise the curtain again and let him observe.
Continue in this way with the other sentences, showing them to the
children in an irregular order. The purpose of this is to show that
the children not only have the thought as a whole, but that they know
the words in each sentence.

By this method children are trained to read groups of words at a
glance. They observe the sentence as a whole, image it as a whole,
and read it as a whole. Comprehension of the thought leads to freedom
of expression. In consequence, pupils will not be heard pronouncing
disconnected words in unnatural, artificial tones.

The development of the lesson is as follows:

    First: Children observe and express.

    Second: The teacher writes this expression on the blackboard.
    When a story of three or four sentences is complete
    the order of interpretation is as follows:

    First: Children observe and image. (Silent reading.)

    Second: Each child in turn expresses the whole thought.

    Third: The children read each sentence. (Oral reading.)

Color appeals to all children. Frequent use of it should be made
in describing birds, flowers, and animals in the first reading lessons.
The following are suggestive lessons containing such words as _big_,
_little_, _pretty_, and adjectives of color.

                        _pretty; my; white._

                     I have a pretty kitty.
                     My kitty is white.
                     Kitty can run and jump.
                     I like my pretty white kitty.


                        _big; little; black._

                     Rover is a big, black dog.
                     I love a little, white kitty.
                     Rover likes my little kitty.
                     Rover and Kitty run and jump.

Vary the work at this point by teaching the word are and putting some
of the stories in the second person. Children will enjoy reading or
talking to an imaginary Rover or Kitty. _Ex.:_

                     I see you, Rover.
                     You are my big, black dog.
                     You can run and jump.
                     I like you, Rover.

                                 XX.

                              SUMMARY.

           Run.     I can      Rover      big        and
           Jump.    I see      Kitty      little     to
           Hop.     I have     bird       pretty     my
           Sing.    I like     a dog      blue       the
                    I love     mother     white
                    catch      father     black
                    are        ball

With this limited vocabulary the teacher is able to formulate many
sentences.

                                XXI.

Write upon the blackboard descriptions given by the children of
grandma, father, mother, baby, or other members of the family. This
will train them to observe closely and to image clearly. (Proceed as
in Lesson XIX.)

                        I have a baby brother.
                        He has brown eyes.
                        He can laugh.
                        He can walk.
                        His name is Robert.

If necessary, let several development lessons precede the story in
order to emphasize certain aspects of thought or particular words.

                                 1.

                        My name is Helen.
                        My name is Mary.
                        My name is John. Etc.

                                 2.

                        Baby brother can laugh.
                        Baby brother can cry.
                        Baby brother can walk.
                        Baby brother can pat-a-cake. Etc.

                                XXII.

Let each child describe his own home. Write one of these descriptions
on the blackboard, somewhat as follows:

                        We live in a house.
                        It is a white house.
                        It is made of wood.
                        It has a yard.

                               XXIII.

In the language lesson show pictures of the home life of children of
other lands. Have the children observe, image, and describe these
pictures. Later, write a description of one of the pictures on the
blackboard as a reading lesson.

                                 1.

                    This is a little Indian boy.
                    He lives in a wigwam.
                    It is made of skins.
                    It is by the blue sea-water.

                                 2.

                    This is a little Eskimo girl.
                    She lives in the North.
                    It is very cold.
                    Her house is made of snow and ice.

Whenever it is necessary, precede the story with one or more
development lessons.

                                XXIV.

Select a little girl with bright dress and attractive coloring to
stand before the class. Ask the children to observe, and then to
close their eyes and image the child. Tell the little girl to step
into the dressing room or behind a screen and have the children
describe her. Express from the image, not from the object. The
teacher writes the description on the blackboard, somewhat as follows:

                                 1.

                       Mary is a little girl.
                       She has blue eyes.
                       She has brown hair.
                       She has a blue dress.

                                 2.

Omit the observation and write upon the blackboard a description of a
boy or a girl in the room. Supply a name and have one of the children
locate the boy or girl. _Ex.:_

                       I see a boy.
                       He has black eyes.
                       He has black hair.
                       He has a red tie.
                       Name the boy,----.

                                XXV.

Nature lessons, handicraft lessons, playthings, games, and everything
which appeals to the interest of the children may be used as material
for the reading lessons. _Ex.:_

                       This is John's kite.
                       It is a big kite.
                       It is a red kite.
                       John made the kite.
                       He can fly his kite.

                                XXVI.

Let the girls having something brown about them impersonate brown
birds. _Ex.:_ Brown eyes; brown ribbons; brown dresses. Have them
read the sentences silently and then perform the action. By a gentle
movement of the arms the birds are represented as flying.

                    Play you are brown birds, girls.
                    Fly, pretty brown birds.
                    Sing, pretty brown birds.

Let the boys having something black about them impersonate
blackbirds. _Ex.:_ Black shoes; black clothing; black eyes.

                    Play you are blackbirds, boys.
                    Hop, little blackbirds.
                    Fly, little blackbirds.

Adapt the following lesson to suit the conditions by changing either
the name or the color. _Ex.:_ If there is a little girl in the room
with a red ribbon whose name is not _Mary_, substitute the real name.

                    Play you are a redbird, Mary.
                    You have a red ribbon.
                    You may sing, pretty redbird.

                               XXVII.

Experience proves that a rapid and easy way for children to learn to
read is by means of nursery rhymes and simple poems. The method of
presenting a rhyme is as follows:

Have the children learn the rhyme by ear and repeat it aloud. Write
the rhyme _Two Little Blackbirds_, on the board. (See Primer, page
23. In order that recognition may take place when the same rhymes
are seen in print, carefully copy the arrangement of the text as
found in the Primer.) Draw a pointer slowly under each line as the
children repeat the rhyme. Do this several times until they begin to
associate the spoken symbol with the written symbol. Children will
soon recognize the elements most prominent.

After teaching the rhyme as a whole, analyze it into parts. Write
lines, phrases, and words in different places on the blackboard. Have
the children observe, image, and find these in the rhyme. _Ex.:_ _Two
little blackbirds_; _upon a hill_; _one was named_; _fly away_; _come
again_.

Ask a child to find all the words that are alike. _Ex.:_ _Jack_;
_Jill_; _named_; _fly_; _come_; _again_; etc. Ask another child to
find and name all the words he knows. Let volunteers find lines,
phrases, and words called for by other children who see them. In
some such way as this every symbol can be brought to the child's
consciousness.

When the children are familiar with the words comprising the rhyme
they are ready to read sentences and stories using these same words
in new relations. Keep the rhyme on the blackboard for reference.
When in doubt about a word let the child find it himself by repeating
the rhyme until he reads that word.

                  *       *       *       *       *

A summary of the steps involved:

    1. Memorize the rhyme in order to acquire the thought.

    2. Associate this thought with the written symbols.

    3. Separate the rhyme into sentences, phrases, and words.

    4. Combine these parts in new wholes; that is, in new sentences
    and stories.

One essential principle in learning to read is that the thought shall
be familiar and interesting. The purpose of the elementary reading
lesson is to associate old thought with a new symbol.

This same rhyme may be modified and used as a game. Select two
children with blue ribbons, dresses, suits, or neckties, to
impersonate bluebirds. Substitute their names and write the rhyme on
the board as follows:

                    Two little bluebirds
                    Sat upon a hill,
                    One was named Helen,
                    The other named Mary.

                    Fly away, Helen,
                    Fly away, Mary.
                    Come again, Helen.
                    Come again, Mary.

Have the two bluebirds read the words from the blackboard, run to a
corner of the room, and stoop down to dramatize the words "sat upon a
hill." At the words "fly away" the little birds run around the room
with outstretched arms to imitate the flying motion. At the words
"come again" they should return to their original position. This
exercise gives repetition of words with variety of thought.

                               XXVIII.

                    Rock-a-by, baby,
                      In the tree-top.
                    When the wind blows
                      The cradle will rock.
                    When the bough breaks
                      The cradle will fall,
                    Down will come baby,
                      Cradle and all.

Memorize the rhyme. Children like to express thought in action,
therefore when memorizing the rhyme let them hold imaginary babies in
their arms and gently rock them to the rhythm of the words.

Write the rhyme on the blackboard. Write the lines, phrases, and
words elsewhere on the blackboard. Let the children observe these and
find them in the rhyme. _Rock-a-by_; _In the tree-top_; _When the
wind blows_; _When the bough breaks_; etc.

Find the words that are alike, _baby_; _cradle_; _when_; _the_;
_will_; etc.


Action Sentences Based on the Rhyme.

Write upon the blackboard the sentence, _Bring me the doll_. Have the
children read it silently. Ask a child to perform the action, and
then read the sentence aloud. Continue in this way with other action
sentences.

                    Play rock-a-by, baby.
                    Make a cradle.
                    Rock the cradle.
                    Sing to the baby.
                    Sing rock-a-by, baby.

A real doll and cradle may be used and the following sentences
be expressed in action:

                    Bring me the doll.
                    Bring me the cradle.
                    Put the doll in the cradle.
                    Rock the cradle.
                    Sing to the doll.
                    Sing rock-a-by, baby.

Teach _bring_, _put_, _make_, and other new verbs as sight words and
use them in preliminary development lessons. _Ex.:_

                    Bring me the ball.
                    Bring me the bell. Etc.

                  *       *       *       *       *

                    Put the ball on the table.
                    Put the bell on the table. Etc.

_Kindergarten Finger Play_ furnishes excellent _action_ upon which
to base the use of the word _make_. _Ex.:_

                    Make baby's ball.
                    Make baby's cradle.
                    Make baby's hammer. Etc.

                                XXIX.

=See-Saw.= (Primer, page 24.) Children like to recite to appropriate
action. Rhythmic movement may be taught with the "See-Saw" rhyme as
follows: While repeating the first two lines sink to a squatting
position and rise again two times. While repeating the second line
bend alternately to the right and left three times. Repeat these
motions with the third and fourth lines.

                                XXX.

=The Transition from Script to Print.= It is impossible to give a
fixed rule stating the time when the child should pass from the
blackboard script to the book. This varies with the age and ability
of the pupils. The observant teacher knows when to place printed
material in the hands of the child by the readiness and ease with
which he reads from the blackboard. It will be necessary to write the
first lessons in the Primer on the blackboard for the children to
observe the resemblance between that which is written upon the board
and that which is printed in the book. Every primary teacher should
_write a clear, legible hand_.

                  *       *       *       *       *

+NOTE+:--"_The Old Woman and Her Pig_," "_The House that Jack
Built_," or other nursery rhymes involving much repetition of
language, will be found helpful for supplementary blackboard lessons.




                             +Part III.+

                           FIRST HALF YEAR:
                             SECOND STEP.


1. Blackboard Lessons and Primer.

2. Phonic Lessons:

    (a) The Consonant Sounds.

    (b) Phonograms derived from Words used
    in the Primer.

    (c) Word Drill.



                    BLACKBOARD LESSONS AND PRIMER.

                     (Time, about twelve weeks.)

=Directions.= 1. There are seventeen rhymes and simple poems in the
Primer. The vocabulary is based on the words found in these rhymes
and poems. Have the children memorize each rhyme. Write it upon the
blackboard and teach the elements as in previous exercises. (See page
43, Part II, Lesson XXVII.)

2. Continue the blackboard lessons along with the reading of the
Primer. If necessary, precede a lesson in the book with one or more
development lessons on the blackboard. (See page 39, Part II, Lesson
XXI.)

3. The enjoyment of poetry must be recognized as a legitimate part
of the child's development. To meet this need a Supplementary List
of Poems is given to be read in connection with the Primer lessons.
Wherever possible the poems have been chosen from books of selected
poems, because these are usually more accessible.

=Reading from the Primer.= Page 31, Paragraph 1. Ask a child to read
the words spoken by Robin Redbreast; ask another child to read the
words spoken by Pussy Cat; ask a third child to read the descriptive
portions of the lesson.

Paragraph 2. Have the children read the sentences silently and
observe the picture on the opposite page. Answer the directions aloud.

Proceed in the same way with paragraph 2, on page 32.

Page 43. While reciting the second part of each stanza have the
children imitate the action named. This may also be played as a
"Singing Game." (See _Songs, Games and Rhymes_ by Eudora Lucas
Hailmann.)

Page 45. Paragraph 1--Read the questions silently and answer them
aloud. Proceed in the same way with similar lessons throughout the
Primer.

Paragraph 2. Observation Game: Place a nut or some other object in
a box. Let the children observe this for an instant only. Use for a
blackboard lesson as follows:

  1. Teacher, write question upon the blackboard.
  2. Children, read the question silently.
  3. Children, answer the question aloud.

The following is a suggestive method for the reading lesson on Page
45, paragraph 2. Ask two children to read the lesson as a dialogue.
_Ex.:_

  First Child: "Is it a red ball?"
  Second Child: "No. It is not a red ball." Etc.

Page 48. Rhythmic movement may accompany this lesson. Have four
children cross right hands to form a windmill. Turn in time while
repeating the rhyme _Blow, Wind! Blow!_ Another windmill motion may
be taught as follows:

Two children stand back to back. Extend the arms and move them
alternately up and down with a gentle fanning motion. Have the
children in their seats recite the rhyme _Blow, Wind! Blow!_

Page 62. Tap rhythmically with the finger tips upon the desk in
imitation of the rain while reciting the poem, _Rain_.

Page 72. Ask several children to pass around the room. Ask a little
boy to lift his cap as he passes by his friends and to greet them by
saying, "How do you do, Mary?" Ask a little girl to _bow_ to a friend
as she passes by and to say, "How do you do,----?" (See game "Going
Walking" in _Popular Folk Games and Dances_ by Marie Ruef Hofer.) Use
the words, "Good morning," if this form of greeting is preferred.
Explain to the children that the name is added as a mark of courtesy.

Page 80. The blackboard lessons may be extended by adding other
animals. _Ex.:_

  1. With a "Moo! Moo!" here, etc.----cows.
  2. With a "Quack! Quack!" here, etc.----ducks.
  3. With a "Bow-wow!" here, etc.----dogs.

                           LIST OF POEMS.

The teacher may read the following poems to the children in
connection with the reading lessons in the Primer as indicated by the
pages.

 11   "Twenty Froggies," by George Cooper.
               _Book: "Pinafore Palace," (Selections) Wiggin &
               Smith (Eds.)._

 26   "When Little Baby Bye-bye Goes." (Author unknown.)
               _Book: "Pinafore Palace."_

 33   "The Secret." (Author unknown.)
               _Book: "Songs of the Tree-Top and Meadow," (Selections)
               McMurry & Cook (Eds.)._

 49   "The Wind," by Robert Louis Stevenson.
               _Book: "A Child's Garden of Verses."_

 57   "Alice's Supper," by Laura E. Richards.
               _Book: "St. Nicholas, Vol. V."_

 59   "Twinkle, Twinkle, Little Star." (Author unknown.)
               _Book: "Songs of the Tree-Top and Meadow."_

 63   "Who Likes the Rain?" by Clara Doty Bates.
               _Book: "Pinafore Palace."_

 65   "The Elf and the Dormouse," by Oliver Herford.
               _Book: "The Posy Ring," (Selections) Wiggin &
               Smith (Eds.)._

 66   "Thank You, Pretty Cow," by Jane Taylor.
               _Book: "The Posy Ring."_

 71   "Little Gustava," by Celia Thaxter.
               _Book: "Poems for Children."_

 103  "Little Jack Frost." (Author unknown.)
               _Book: "Pinafore Palace."_

 104  "The Snow-Bird's Song," by F. C. Woodworth.
               _Book: "Pinafore Palace."_

 107  "Bye, Baby, Night is Come," by Mary Mapes Dodge.
               _Book: "Rhymes and Jingles."_


                           PHONIC LESSONS.

                     (Time, about twelve weeks.)

=Directions.= 1. There are twenty-five elementary consonant sounds.
The purpose of the phonic lessons is to associate these consonant
sounds with the letters representing them, and to become accustomed
to the use of phonograms based upon words in the Primer. Word
recognition should become automatic. See page 112 for a scientific
arrangement of the consonant sounds.

2. All of the blackboard work should be written, not printed. The
child reproduces by a more or less unconscious imitation the written
forms which he sees upon the blackboard.

3. The lessons indicate the order; the time will vary with the
ability of the children and must be determined by the teacher.

                                 I.

                               _r un_.

Begin with the word _run_. This is a part of the child's vocabulary,
having been learned in the early reading lessons. Appeal is made
first to the ear, then to the eye. The teacher conducts the lesson as
follows:

The Ear.

    1. Pronounce _run_ easily and naturally.

    2. Give the sounds separately, thus: _r-un_.

    3. Again pronounce the word. Call upon the children collectively
       and individually to do the same.

The Eye.

    1. Write the word _run_ on the blackboard.

    2. Cover the _un_ and have the _r_ sounded.

    3. Cover the _r_ and have the _un_ sounded.

    4. Uncover the whole word and ask the children to put the
       two sounds together to make the word, _run_.

If the children cannot do this the teacher may do it for them, making
the sound _r_ prominent. The ability to blend one sound with another
should not be a difficult phase of the work. The teacher's attitude
toward blending is the influence which makes it hard or easy for the
child.

To associate the sound _r_ with its written symbol the following
method is suggested:

The teacher writes _r_ upon the blackboard, giving the sound, not the
name. She then calls upon the children collectively and individually
to give the sound.

                  *       *       *       *       *

_Teacher_: Close your eyes, children. Can you see how _r_ looks?
(Give the sound, not the name.) Watch me make it again.

Teacher writes _r_ slowly several times, then erases the work.
Children observe, image, and then write _r_ upon the blackboard or
upon paper. If a mistake is made have the child erase, again observe
the teacher as she makes the letter, then write it a second time.

                                 II.

                                _f._

Teach the word _fun_ in the same manner that _run_ was taught in
Lesson I. Write on the blackboard:

                               _r un_
                               _f un_

Cover first one part and then the other, sounding each element.

Write _f_, _r_, _un_, on the blackboard a number of times, arranged
irregularly. Review daily, adding new consonants and phonograms as
they are taught.

                                III.

                              _s ing._

1. Separate both the spoken and the written word _sing_ into the
phonic elements:

    (a) _s_ consonant sound.

    (b) _ing_ phonogram or sound group.

2. Associate each sound element with its written symbol.

3. Combine the consonants _r_, _f_, _s_, and the phonograms _un_,
_ing_, to form new words:

                   r un    s ing    r ing    s un
                   s un    r ing    r un     s ing

                                 IV.

=Phonic Drill.= Phonic Drill upon words from the Primer will each day
follow two lines:

    I. A list of words to be separated into sounds (Phonic Analysis).

   II. A list of familiar sounds to be combined in new relations to
       form words (Phonic Synthesis).

Phonic Drill upon phonograms and the consonant sounds may be
given in two ways:

    1. Combine different consonant sounds with the same phonogram.

    2. Combine different phonograms with the same consonant
       sound.

For convenience the first is called a _Phonic Series_; the second is
called a _Word List_.

=Phonic Series.= Combine _f_, _r_, _s_, with _at_ to form this phonic
series. Review the _un_ series of words.

Develop the blend as follows:

(a) Write _at_ on the blackboard and pronounce it. (The children will
recognize the word, having seen it many times in the reading lessons.)

(b) Select a consonant, _r_ for example, and write it in front of
_at_.

(c) Combine the two elements into a whole word without making more of
a separation than is necessary to explain the blending of the sounds.

Prefix _f_ and _s_ in the same way.

Write the _at_ and the _un_ series on the blackboard.

                            r at    r un
                            f at    f un
                            s at    s un

Children pronounce the words. Cover first one part and then the
other, sounding each element. Review daily, adding new sound elements
as they are taught. As soon as possible refrain from assisting the
children by covering the parts.


=Word List.= Write upon the blackboard in a vertical row the words
beginning with _r_, from the Primer, pages 5-26. _Ex.:_ _Rover_,
_roll_, _rock_. Have the children pronounce them. Then erase _over_,
_oll_, _ock_, leaving only _r_, and let children make the sound.
Continue with words beginning with _f_ and _s_ in the same way.

Again, write several words on the blackboard containing the phonogram
_at_. Erase _f_, _s_, _r_, leaving only _at_.

Continue in the same way with the _un_ series and the _ing_ series.

                  *       *       *       *       *

Word List No. I.

                       s ing    r at     f un
                       s at     r ing    f at
                       s un     r un

Retain this list on the blackboard for daily drill, rearranging the
order from time to time and adding new words as they are taught. The
lists for word drill are not final. Let use be the guide in deciding
the number of words to be taught. The analysis of these words into
their sound elements will determine the number of phonograms to
be taught. Proper drill upon both the phonic series and the word
lists leads to sight recognition of words, by means of their sound
elements. This is the purpose of phonic work.

=Phonic Cards.= All drill work should train the mind to observe
accurately, to image vividly, and to express quickly. In every
exercise aim to secure, first, clear images; second, rapid work. It
interferes with normal growth and development to reverse this order.
To accomplish these ends, prepare a set of phonic cards each one
representing a separate sound or phonogram, and use for rapid sight
work after the board work has been given. Cut cards to a uniform size
of eight by six inches, out of heavy paper, and write with India ink
and a camel's hair brush. Stand in front of the class and call upon
the children in order. If the child cannot give the sound instantly,
call upon another. Children will work rapidly if they are trained to
do so. Review frequently and as the need arises prepare new cards. It
is quite possible to have repetition with a constant variety of new
material.

                                 V.

                               _h op._

1. Write _hop_ on the blackboard and teach the sound elements
_h_ and _op_.

2. Associate each sound with its symbol.

3. Identify the sound _h_ in the sight words _have_, _has_, _here_,
_hill_. (Proceed as in Lesson IV.)

4. Add _hop_ to Word List No. 1, and review daily, for a few
moments, at the close of each lesson.

                                 VI.

                                _j._

1. Separate the sight words _Jack_, _Jill_, _jump_, into their sound
elements.

    (a) If any of the children in the class have names beginning
    with _J_ add these to the list, as: John, Julia, Jones.

    (b) Use capital letters for proper names, small letters for
    common ones. Meet each need by teaching that for which
    there is a demand.

2. Associate the sound _j_ with the letter.

3. Combine _ill_, _ack_, _ump_, with the known consonant sounds to
form the phonic series:

                       _ill_    _ack_    _ump_

                       r ill    J ack    j ump
                       f ill    s ack    h ump
                       s ill    h ack
                       J ill    r ack
                       h ill

                                VII.

                                _m._

1. Write _may_ on the blackboard and teach the sound elements
_m_ and _ay_.

2. Associate each sound with its symbol.

3. Identify _m_ in the sight words _Mary_, _my_, _me_, _mother_.

4. Combine _ay_ with familiar consonant sounds to form the phonic
series:

                                h ay
                                s ay
                                j ay
                                r ay

5. Combine the sound _m_ with the phonograms _ill_, _op_, _at_,
previously taught. Add these to Word List No. 1 for review.

                                VIII.

                        _p_, initial; final.

1. Initial _p_--the first sound heard in _pussy_, _play_, _pretty_.

2. Final _p_--the last sound heard in _hop_, _up_, _jump_, _sleep_.

3. Associate the sound _p_ with the letter.

4. Combine _p_ with familiar phonograms to form the words _pat_,
_pack_, _pill_, _pop_, _pump_, _pay_.

5. Add these words to Word List No. 1 and drill daily. Cultivate
rapid sight recognition of the sound elements.

                                 IX.

                         _in, am, an, and._

It is assumed that the children know these phonograms, having learned
them as sight words in the reading lessons. If they fail to recognize
them, use _in_, _am_, _an_, _and_, in sentences and teach them again
as sight words.

Blend familiar consonant sounds with these phonograms to form the new
phonic series.

                    _in_    _am_    _an_    _and_

                    f in    S am    m an    h and
                    s in    h am    f an    s and
                    p in    j am    r an      and

                                 X.

                              SUMMARY.

Consonants:

            _r_, _f_, _s_, _h_, _j_, _m_, _p_.

Phonograms:

            _at_, _ack_, _am_, _an_, _and_, _ay_,
            _ing_, _ill_, _in_,
            _op_,
            _un_, _ump_.

Phonic Series.

        _at_     _ack_     _am_     _an_     _and_     _ay_

        h at     p ack     j am     m an     h and     j ay
        m at     r ack     h am     r an     s and     h ay
        f at     J ack     S am     f an       and     s ay
        s at     h ack              p an               p ay
        r at     s ack


        _ing_     _ill_     _in_     _op_     _un_    _ump_

        r ing     m ill     f in     m op     s un    j ump
        s ing     h ill     s in     h op     f un    h ump
                  f ill     p in     p op     r un    p ump
                  t ill
                  s ill

Word List No. II.

        rack    sand    ham     hand    mop     pop     Jack
        ran     say     hill    hop     mill    pan     Jill
        ray     Sam     hack    may     pill    pack    jump
        fill    sack    hat     man     pat     pin     jay
        fin     sin     hay     mat     pay     pump    jam

+NOTE.+--

    (a) As soon as the children can read the words arranged in
    a series, take them irregularly. When they have power quickly
    to perceive and blend the sound elements, refrain from covering
    the parts. The goal is instant sight recognition.

    (b) Secure individual recitations. Concert work has its
    place, but the object is individual power.

    (c) Note the words over which the children hesitate and
    make these the basis of the next arrangement.

    (d) Frequently rearrange the phonic list. The object is not
    to memorize the words, but to give the children the power to
    read them by their sound elements.

    (e) Add the names of children in the class to the word lists
    and analyze these into their sound elements.

                                 XI.

                             Final _s_.

Add _s_ to all the words in Word Lists Nos. I and II, where its use
will form a word.

Write the simple form of the word on the blackboard and have it
pronounced. Write it again with the _s_ added, and have it pronounced
a second time. _Ex.:_

                        sing          sing s
                        ring          ring s
                        run            run s
                        tree          tree s
                         see           see s

It will be found helpful to have a card seven by nine inches, with
an _s_ written upon it. Hold this beside the words in the phonic
lists and have both the simple and the _s_ forms pronounced. Train
the children to observe quickly and to be mentally alert.

                                XII.

                    _t_, initial; final; medial.

 1. Initial _t_--the first sound heard in _top_, _tell_.

 2. Final _t_--the last sound heard in _it_, _at_.

 3. Medial _t_--in _Kitty_, _pretty_, _little_.

 4. Associate the sound _t_ with the letter.

 5. Identify _t_ in the following sight words from the Primer, pages
 9-39: _to_, _town_, _tick-tock_, _tune_, _nest_, _not_, _nut_, _cat_.

 6. Combine familiar consonant sounds with _it, ot_, to form the
 phonic series:

                            _it_      _ot_

                            s it      h ot
                            h it      p ot
                            p it      t ot

 7. Review the _at_ series, making prominent the sound _t_ final.

                                XIII.

                     _k_, _ck_, initial; final.

 1. _K_ in _kitty_, _kite_, _keep_, _shook_, _look_, _bake_, _Kate_.
 2. _ck_ in _tick-tock_, _cluck_, _Jack_, _black_, _clock_, _rock_.
 3. Phonograms: _ick_, _ock_.
 4. Phonic Series:

                        _ick_          _ock_

                        p ick          r ock
                        t ick          t ock
                        s ick          d ock
                        D ick          s ock
                        h ick ory
                        d ick ory

 5. Add _king_, _kill_, also words in the phonic series to Word List
 No. II, and review daily.

                                XIV.

                    _l_, initial; final; medial.

 1. Initial _l_ in _like_, _look_.
 2. Final _l_ in _ball_, _hill_.
 3. Associate the sound _l_ with the letter.
 4. Identify sound _l_ in the following sight words from the Primer:
 _like_, _little_, _ball_, _all_, _fall_, _doll_, _hill_, _Jill_,
 _will_, _mill_, _roll_, _yellow_.
 5. Include the names of children in the room. _Ex.:_ _Lucy_, _Nellie_,
 _Lilly_, _Paul_.
 6. Phonogram: _all_.
 7. Phonic Series:

                                _all_

                                f all
                                h all
                                t all

 8. Review the _ill_ series, making prominent final _l_.

                                 XV.

                    _n_, initial; final; medial.

 1. Analyze _not_ into the sound elements _n_, _ot_.
 2. Identify the sound _n_ in the sight words _no_, _nut_, _nest_,
 _name_, _an_, _can_, _ran_, _in_, _on_, _run_, _hen_.
 3. Include names of children in the room: Ned, John, Anna,
 Nan.
 4. Analyze _hen_ into the sound elements _h_, _en_.
 5. Phonogram: _en_.
 6. Phonic Series:

                                _en_

                                m en
                                p en
                                h en
                                t en

 7. Review the _an_, _in_, _un_ series, making prominent final _n_.

                                XVI.

                        _d_, initial; final.

 1. Identify sound _d_ in the sight words _dog_, _do_, _doll_, _down_,
 _dear_, _red_, _send_.
 2. Separate _red_ into the sound elements _r_, _ed_.
 3. Add _d_ to the phonogram _en_ taught in Lesson XV.
 4. Phonograms: _ed_, _end_.
 5. Phonic Series:

                             _ed_    _end_

                             f ed    s end
                             r ed    m end
                             N ed    l end
                             l ed    t end

 6. Word List: Add these words to Word List No. II. Arrange
 irregularly and review daily.

                                XVII.

                       _pl_; _fr_; _tr_; _ee_.

Blended consonants _pl_, _fr_, _tr_. (Blended consonants are made as
nearly as possible with one impulse of the voice.)

 1. Identify the sounds _pl_, _fr_, _tr_, _ee_ in the words:

                     plant    tree    frog    see
                     play     try     from    three

 2. Combine _ee_ with final _p_, _d_, _m_, _n_, to form phonograms.

 3. Phonic Series:

                       _eep_    _eed_    _eem_; _een_

                       p eep    s eed    s eem
                       d eep    f eed    s een
                       k eep    d eed    k een


                               XVIII.

                               _ing._

Write the simple form of the word upon the blackboard and have
it pronounced. Write it again with the syllable _ing_ added, and
have it pronounced a second time. _Ex.:_

              sing     sing ing     go          go ing
              jump     jump ing     catch    catch ing
              ring     ring ing     play      play ing
              fly       fly ing     rock      rock ing
              see       see ing     blow      blow ing
              do         do ing     sleep    sleep ing

                                XIX.

                        Apostrophe _s_ (_'s_)

Teach the apostrophe ('_s_) by adding it to the names of children in
the room. Place upon the blackboard a group of sentences which the
children have given orally. _Ex.:_

            This is Mary's sister.   I see Jill's pail.
            This is John's ball.     I see Jack's kite.
            This is Helen's hat.     I see baby's kitten.

Let the children read the sentences. As the children watch, erase
_This is_, _I see_, _I have_, etc., leaving the possessive form. Add
these words to Word List No. II. Rearrange the order and drill daily.

                                 XX.

                              SUMMARY.

 1. Consonants: _r_, _f_, _s_, _h_, _j_, _m_, _p_, _t_, _k_, _ck_,
                _l_, _n_, _d_.
 2. Blended consonants: _pl_, _fr_, _tr_.
 3. Final _s_, apostrophe _s_, _ing_ (syllable).
 4. Phonograms: _at_, _ack_, _am_, _an_, _and_, _ay_, _all_.
                _en_, _ed_, _end_, _ee_, _eep_, _eed_, _eem_, _een_.
                _ing_, _ill_, _in_, _it_, _ick_.
                _op_, _ot_, _ock_.
                _un_, _ump_.

 5. Word List No. III.

    tack   rock     lot       popping    Mary's    not       Fred's
    tan    rocks    lock      plot       fall      Nat's     tray
    tall   rocking  rings     play       falling   Nan's     track
    ten    red      ringing   plays      fed       day       tree
    tick   Jill's   Sam's     playing    feed      deep      trees
    tock   land     sings     saying     fit       deed      sit
    top    lay      singing   mumps      peep      Dick's    seeing
    keep   lend     pack      mend       peeping   dock      sick
    king   Jack's   pot       men        pumping   dickory   seed
    kitten John's   free      need       nun       frog      seen

                                XXI.

                          _b_; _bl_; _br_.

 1. _b_ in _boy_, _big_, _bird_, _baby_, _ball_, _by_, _be_, _back_,
    _but_, _baa_, _bake_, _bow_.
 2. _bl_ in _blue_, _black_, _blows_.
 3. _br_ in _breaks_, _brown_, _breast_, _bread_, _broom_, _umbrellas_.
 4. Phonogram: _ake_.
 5. Phonic Series:

                                _ake_

                                m ake
                                r ake
                                l ake
                                b ake

 6. Combine _b_, _br_, _bl_ with familiar phonograms to make the word
 list _bun_, _bat_, _band_, _bin_, _ball_, _bee_, _bring_, _blot_,
 _bump_, _block_.

                                XXII.

                             _g_; _gr_.

 1. _g_ in _go_, _girl_, _egg_, _pig_, _gave_, _get_, _good_.
 2. _gr_ in _green_, _grass_, _grow_, _grunt_, _grandma_, _grandpa_,
    _grind_.
 3. Phonograms: _ig_, _og_.
 4. Phonic Series:

                            _ig_     _og_

                            f ig     f og
                            j ig     j og
                            d ig     l og
                            b ig     d og
                            p ig    fr og
                                     b og

+NOTE.+--

 In pronouncing the vocal consonants _b_, _d_, _g_, the voice
 should be placed _well forward_. The vibrations for _b_ are _in the
 lips_; for _d_ in the _point of the tongue_; for _g_ in the _back of
 the tongue_.

                               XXIII.

                          _y_ (consonant).

 Consonant _y_ is always initial.
 _y_ in _you_, _your_, _yes_, _yellow_.

+NOTE.+--

 _y_ (vowel) is given in the Manual, Part IV, page 88.

                                XXIV.

                                _w._

 1. _w_ the wind sound; it resembles _oo_ in _boot_.
 2. _w_ in _we_, _way_, _wind_, _will_, _went_, _waves_, _wash_,
    _window_, _water_, _wool_, _weave_, _west_.
 3. Phonogram: _est_.
 4. Phonic Series:

                                w est
                                r est
                                b est
                                n est

 5. Word List:

               wing     win     weep     wick     will
               will     wall    way      wig      wills

                                XXV.

                                _wh._

 1. _wh_ the blowing sound.
    _w_ is vocal, while _wh_ is breath.
 2. _wh_ in _what_, _when_, _wheat_, _where_, _why_, _white_.
 3. Phonogram: _ite_.
 4. Phonic Series: _white_, _kite_, _bite_.

                                XXVI.

                            _th_ (vocal).

The soft sound of _th_ is vocal; the hard sound is breath.

_th_ (soft) in _that_, _this_, _there_, _they_, _them_.

+NOTE.+--

 It is not wise to teach two sounds for one symbol in the
 early lessons. Vocal _th_ is taught first because it is the one more
 frequently used in the Primer. See _th_ (breath) Part V, page 112.

                               XXVII.

               _ch_, initial and final; _tch_, final.

 1. _ch_ in _church_, _chick_, _chicken_, _chop_, _churn_, _rich_,
    _such_, _much_.
 2. _tch_ in _catch_, _match_, _hatch_.

                               XXVIII.

                        _sh_, initial; final.

 1. _sh_ in _she_, _ship_, _sheep_, _shook_, _wish_, _push_.
 2. Phonograms: _ook_, _ush_.
 3. Phonic Series:

                          _ook_       _ush_

                          b ook       m ush
                          t ook      br ush
                          l ook       h ush
                         br ook       r ush
                          h ook
                          sh ook


                                XXIX.

                               REVIEW.

 1. Consonants: _r_, _f_, _s_, _h_, _j_, _m_, _p_, _t_.
                _k-ck_, _l_, _n_, _d_, _b_, _g_.
                _y_, _w_, _wh_, _th (soft)_, _ch_, _sh_.

 2. Blended consonants: _pl_, _fr_, _tr_, _bl_, _br_, _gr_, _tch_.

 3. Phonograms: _at_, _ack_, _am_, _an_, _and_, _ay_, _all_, _ake_.
                _en_, _ed_, _end_, _ee_, _eep_, _eed_, _eem_, _een_,
                _est_.
                _ing_, _ill_, _in_, _it_, _ick_, _ig_, _ite_.
                _op_, _ot_, _ock_, _og_, _ook_.
                _un_, _ump_, _ush_.

 4. Word List No. IV.

        bat      bite      wee       brick      than       shook
        back     book      weep      bring      then       shed
        band     bump      weed      brook      thing      sheep
        ball     bumping   wing      brush      thrush     shop
        bake     best      will      brushing   hatch      shot
        bed      gay       win       grand      match      blot
        bend     got       wick      gray       latch      black
        bill     gun       wig       greed      patch      bleed
        bit      way       Will's    green      catch      block
        big      wake      west      that       shake      when




                              Part IV.

                         SECOND HALF YEAR:
                             THIRD STEP.


                1. Reading from the First Reader.

                2. Phonic Lessons:

                   (a) The Vowel Sounds.
                   (b) Equivalent Vowel Sounds.
                   (c) Word Drill.


                   READING FROM THE FIRST READER.

                    (Time, about twenty weeks.)

=Directions=. 1. In the Primer, the First Reader, and the Second
Reader, the words of the vocabulary are arranged in the order in
which they first occur, and are grouped by pages in a word list
placed in the back of the book. Since teachers usually write
unfamiliar words upon the blackboard and develop them in a word drill
preceding the reading lesson, it has not been thought necessary to
place the new words at the beginning of each lesson. (See Spelling,
page 17. Also Word Drill, page 19.)

2. If necessary precede a lesson in the First Reader with a
development lesson on the blackboard. (See page 39, Part II, Lesson
XXI.)

3. A Supplementary List of Poems is given to be read in connection
with the lessons in the First Reader. Do not ask children to retell
the poems read aloud. To develop an appreciation of poetry is the
object. Children who have been accustomed to hearing poetry will read
and enjoy the poems in their readers as much as the stories. The
teacher's attitude toward poetry is the suggestion that influences.


                          THE FIRST READER.

Page 7. Memorize the poem. Write it upon the blackboard and
teach the elements as in the Primer lessons based upon Nursery
Rhymes. (See page 43, Part II, Lesson XXVII.)

Page 10. Teach as indicated above.

Page 11. _Something to Tell._ Have the children read the questions
silently, and then answer them aloud.

Page 12. This lesson was suggested by reading George Cooper's
poem, _Come, Little Leaves_.

Page 96. This lesson was suggested by reading Frederick Manley's
poem, _The Journey's End_, in the _Modern Music Primer_.

Page 102. This lesson was suggested by reading Frederick Manley's
poem, _The Woodpecker_, in the _Modern Music Primer_.

                           LIST OF POEMS.

The teacher may read the following poems to the children in
connection with the reading lessons in the First Reader as indicated
by the pages.

 12 "Come, Little Leaves," by George Cooper.
          _Book: "Pinafore Palace," (Selections) Wiggin & Smith (Eds.)._

 20 "The Little Doves." (Author unknown.)
          _Book: "Pinafore Palace."_

 34 "The Crow's Children," by Phoebe Cary.
          _Book: "Ballads for Little Folks."_

 44 "How the Leaves Came Down," by Susan T. Coolidge.
          _Book: "Songs of the Tree-Top and Meadow," (Selections)
          McMurry and Cook (Eds.)._

 54 "My Bed is a Boat," by Robert Louis Stevenson.
          _Book: "A Child's Garden of Verses."_

 63 "The Water Mill." Aunt Effie's Rhymes.
          _Book: "Child Life," (Selections) John G. Whittier (Ed.)._

 63 "The Johnny Cake." (Author unknown.)
          _Book_: Whittier's "_Child Life."_

 78 "O Lady Moon," by Christina G. Rossetti.
          _Book: "Sing-Song."_

 80 "An Old-Fashioned Rhyme," by Emilie Poulsson.
          _Book: "In the Child's World."_

 94 "A Diamond or a Coal," by Christina G. Rossetti.
          _Book: "Sing-Song."_

 102 "One, Two, Three," by Henry C. Bunner.
          _Book: "The Posy Ring," (Selections) Wiggin & Smith (Eds.)._

 109 "The Sweet Red Rose," by Mary Mapes Dodge.
          _Book: "Songs of the Tree-Top and Meadow."_

 115 "Nursery Song," by Mrs. Carter.
          _Book: "Songs of the Tree-Top and Meadow."_

 118 "The Cow-Boy's Song," by Anna M. Wells.
          _Book: "The Posy Ring."_

 128 "The Seed," by Kate L. Brown.
          _Book: "Songs of the Tree-Top and Meadow."_

 137 "To a Honey Bee," by Alice Cary.
          _Book: "Ballads for Little Folks."_

 139 "Over in the Meadow," by Olive A. Wadsworth.
          _Book: Whittier's "Child Life."_

 149 "What Robin Told," by George Cooper.
          _Book: "Songs of the Tree-Top and Meadow."_

 152 "A. Apple Pie," by Edward Lear.
          _Book: "Pinafore Palace."_

                           PHONIC LESSONS.

                     (Time, about twenty weeks.)

=Directions.= 1. In Phonic Lessons, First Half Year, Second Step, the
child learned the consonant sounds and some of the common phonograms.
In the second half year phonograms are analyzed for the purpose of
recognizing the vowel sounds as elements. There are twenty elementary
vowel sounds. The purpose of the phonic lessons is to associate
these vowels with the symbols representing them. See page 113 for a
scientific arrangement of the vowel sounds.

                                 I.

                            _a_ (short).

 1. Separate _at_ into the sound elements _a_ and _t_. (Give the
 sound, not the name.)

 2. Associate the sound with the letter.

 3. Combine _a_ (short) with the consonants _n_, _m_, _t_, _p_, _d_,
 to form the phonograms _an_, _am_, _at_, _ap_, _ad_.

 4. Analyze short words containing the sound of _a_ (short) into
 phonic elements. (A knowledge of the elementary sounds is the
 foundation upon which rests the power to recognize new words.)

                fan      jam      mat      sad      tap
               f a n    j a m    m a t    s a d    t a p

 5. Analyze the following words, making prominent _a_ (short):
 _rat_, _Sam_, _pat_, _had_, _sat_, _thank_, _sang_, _ash_, _splash_.

                                 II.

                             _a_ (long).

Final _e_ causes the preceding vowel to take its _name_ instead
of its _sound_. Do not teach the rule, but its application. No
diacritical marks are necessary to indicate the short and long vowel
sounds. (Children quickly discover that the final _e_ changes the
preceding vowel from the sound to the name. This is true of almost
all words. When there is a phonetic exception it should be taught as
a sight word.)

 1. Write _at_ on the blackboard and have it pronounced. Write _ate_
 beside it and have it pronounced. (The teacher may do this first
 and have the children learn the force of _e_ by observation and
 imitation.) _Ex.:_ _at ate_.

 2. Combine different consonants and phonograms to illustrate
 this principle.

                      at      ate      an      ane
                    f at    f ate    p an    p ane

              am      ame      ap      ape      ad     ade
            S am    s ame    t ap    t ape    m ad   m ade

 There are a few exceptions to this rule. _Ex.:_ _have_. Teach this
 word to the child just as the name of any new sight word is told
 him.

 3. Analyze the following words, making prominent _a_ (long): _came_,
 _name_, _take_, _same_, _taste_, _bake_, _cake_, _wake_, _spade_.

                                III.

                         _ay_ = _a_ (long).

 1. _ay_ is an equivalent symbol for _a_ (long).

 2. Analyze the following words: _hay_, _jay_, _say_, _stay_, _may_,
 _way_, _day_, _lay_, _gray_, _play_.

                                 IV.

                         _ai_ = _a_ (long).

 1. _ai_ is an equivalent symbol for _a_ (long).

 2. Combine _ai_ with consonants to form the phonograms _ail, ain,
 ait, aid_.

 3. Word List for analysis:

 hail chain    train
 pail pain     stain
 tail rain     wait
 fail raining  waited
 sail gain     waiting
 mail paid     afraid

                                 V.

                       _c_ (hard); _cr_; _cl_.

_c_ (hard) and _k_ have the same sound. It is interesting to note
that _c_ is oftener found to begin words and _k_ to end them.

 1. _c_ in _can_, _come_, _cat_, _cow_, _corn_, _coo_, _cold_.

 2. _cr_ in _cradle_, _cream_.

 3. _cl_ in _clip-clap_, _climbs_, _clock_, _cluck_.

 4. Phonograms: _ow_, _own_, _old_.

 5. Phonic Series:

                     c ow         t own     t old
                     b ow         br own    g old
                     h ow         d own     f old
                     b ow-w ow    fr own    h old

 6. Word List:

                 camp     came  cling  clay      crook
                 camping  can   cluck  clump     crop
                 call     cake  clock  creep     crash
                 calls    cook  click  creeping  crush
                 called   cow   clam   crack     crown
                 cat      cot   clap   cradle    cream

                                  VI.

                             _e_ (short).

 1. Separate _red_ into the sound elements _r_ and _ed_.

 2. Separate _ed_ into the sound elements _e_ and _d_. (Give sound,
 not name.)

 The teacher should pronounce it first, and let the children
 learn by imitation. Be careful to give the correct vowel sound.

 3. Combine _e_ (short) with consonants to form the phonograms
 _en_, _em_, _et_, _ell_, _eg_, _elf_, _elt_, _esh_.

 4. Word List:

         pet      yet       leg        fell     sled
         set      met       bell       Nell's   bed
         wet      let       sell       when     red
         net      hem       tell       then     melt
         self     them      shell      den      end
         shelf    peg       selling    men      ends
         get      beg       telling    hens     threshers
         getting  begging   well       ten      bench

                                VII.

                           _e_ (long); ee.

Final _e_ takes its name when it is the only vowel in the word.
_Ex.:_ _he_, _she_, _we_, _me_, _be_.

The sound of _ee_ is the same as the name of _e_. It is not necessary
to connect double letters artificially with a bar or mark of any
kind. Children soon learn that one sound is used for both letters.

Combine _ee_ with the consonants used both as initials and finals to
build words.

 Phonic Series:

                   _eet_     _eel_    _eed_     _eep_

                   b eet     h eel    f eed     p eep
                   f eet     f eel    s eed     k eep
                  sl eet     p eel    w eed    sh eep
                 str eet    st eel    d eed     w eep
                  sh eet    wh eel    n eed     d eep

 Word List.

            feed     sleeping   deed      keep       teeth
            need     beef       seed      peeping    he
            seem     speed      deep      keeping    she
            seems    meet       seen      tree       we
            peep     see        sheep     three      me
            sleep    bee        weep      cheese     be

                                VIII.

                         _ea_ = _e_ (long).

 1. _ea_ is an equivalent symbol for _e_ (long).

 2. Combine _ea_ with consonants to form the phonograms _eal_, _ean_,
 _eam_, _ear_, _eap_, _eat_, _eave_.

 3. Word List:

            meal   reap      lean       weave     teacher
            seal   read      leap       leave     tear
            bean   lead      leaping    stream    dear
            seat   eager     heat       please    near
            meat   reaping   heater     teach     hear
            neat   reaper    wheat      each      hearing

                                 IX.

                         _ed_ = _d_ (final).

_ed_ = _d_ when added to a word ending in a _vocal_ consonant.

_ed_ = _t_ when added to a word ending in a _breath_ consonant.

Write the simple form of the word on the blackboard, and have
it pronounced. Write it again with the _ed_ added, and have it pronounced
a second time. Do not teach it as a separate sound. Call
attention to the difference in form and the corresponding difference
in sound.

              _ed_ = _t_                _ed_ = _d_

          dress    dressed            play     played
          pass     passed             cover    covered
          dance    danced             live     lived
          wish     wished             call     called
          drop     dropped            roll     rolled

                               REVIEW.

          rain     rains              raining    rained
          jump     jumps              jumping    jumped
          tap      taps               tapping    tapped
          walk     walks              walking    walked
          look     looks              looking    looked
          pick     picks              picking    picked

                                 X.

                                _x._

 1. _x_ = _ks_ as in _milks_. _x_ is not one of the simple elementary
 sounds.

 2. _x_ in _ax_, _fox_, _six_, _next_, _Foxy_, _Loxy_, _wax_.

                                 XI.

                            _i_ (short).

 1. Separate _it_ into the sound elements _i_ and _t_. (Give sound, not
 name.)

 2. Combine _i_ (short) with consonants to form the phonograms _in_,
 _im_, _ip_, _id_, _ib_, _it_, _ig_, _ill_, _iss_, _ish_, _ick_.

 3. Word List:

          him      tip-top     dim        fin        with
          lip      sit         lid        wish       kiss
          hid      sitting     ill        dish       miss
          bit      whip        chill      wished     brick
          pin      ship        rill       silver     click
          pinned   dipping     rip        picked     till
          sick     dipped      rim        mittens    mitten
          thick    did         spilled    kittens    written
          pick     dinner      rib        big        pig


Give a short drill each day at the close of the lesson upon the
phonic list.

                                XII.

                             _i_ (long).

 1. Teach _i_ (long) in the same manner in which _a_ (long) was
 taught. (See page 81, paragraph II.)

 2. Combine different consonants and phonograms to illustrate this
 principle.

           it      ite      ip      ipe      id      ide
         b it    b ite    r ip    r ipe    r id    r ide

              in      ine               im      ime
            p in    p ine             d im    d ime

 3. Word List:

            ice      mite     white     line    wise
            mice     chime    ripe      lime    wiser
            nice     chide    ride      fire    spring
            side     shine    rides     wire    hive
            beside   wide     riding    rise    five
            mine     wipe     dime      ripe    pine

                                XIII.

                    _y_, vowel (short and long).

 1. _y_ (short) has almost always the sound of _i_ (short). It is the
 last sound heard in _Mary_, _baby_, _pretty_, _frosty_, _lady_.

 _y_ (long) is the same as _i_ (long). It is the last sound heard in
 _my_, _fly_, _sky_, _by_, _dry_, _try_, _cry_.

 2. Word List:

        happy                  nicely            Hickory Dickory
        sandy                  carry             empty
        fairy                  flying            Blacky
        Henny Penny            crying            Browny
        Foxy Loxy              myself            Whitey
        Ducky Lucky            goodby            sky
        Turkey Lurkey          drying            frosty

                                XIV.

                               _igh._

 1. _igh_ is an equivalent symbol for _i_ (long).

 2. _igh_ in _high_, _higher_, _flight_, _thigh_, _night_, _fight_,
 _sight_, _bright_, _light_, _right_, _might_, _lightning_.

                                 XV.

                    _v_, initial; final; medial.

 1. _v_ in _violet_, _very_, _visit_, _love_, _weave_, _voice_, _every_.

 2. Phonogram: _ave_.

 3. Word List: gave, cave, pave, wave.

                                XVI.

                            _o_ (short).

 1. Separate _on_ into the elements _o_ (short) and _n_.

 2. Combine _o_ (short) with the final consonants _n_, _m_, _p_, _t_,
 _b_, _d_, _ss_, _g_, to form phonograms, and with initial consonants
 to form words.

                           ot      ob      op
                         c ot    r ob    h op

 3. Word List: (Let the children find other words in the Reader.)

        top                 pop                softer
        stop                Tom                longer
        not                 lost               knock
        spot                frost              knocker
        locked              frosty             knocking
        off                 from               knocked
        rock                stronger           moss
        flock               logs               toss
        hopping             lost               chop
        pot                 soft               chopping

                                XVII.

                             _o_ (long).

 1. Teach _o_ (long) in the same manner in which _a_ (long) was
 taught. (See page 81, paragraph II.)

 2. Combine different consonants and phonograms to illustrate
 this principle:

               hop     rob     not     mop
              hope    robe    note    mope

 3. Word List:

        old                 rode               bone
        hole                rose               stove
        hope                mole               smoke
        those               home               alone
        chose               hoe                spoke
        note                rope               broke
        nose                more               those
        toe                 core               shore
        pole                sore               chore

                               XVIII.

                         _o_ (final); _oa_.

 1. -_o_, _oa_ are equivalent symbols for _o_ (long).

 2. _o_ in _go_, _so_, _no_.

 3. Combine _oa_ with consonants, initial and final, to form
 phonograms and words: _t_, _d_, _m_, _n_, _ch_, _k_, _r_, _l_, _f_.

 4. _oa_ in _boat_, _load_, _loam_, _loaf_, _moan_, _coat_, _oak_,
 _oats_, _roaming_, _coal_, _toad_, _road_, _loads_, _loan_, _roar_,
 _oar_, _boards_.

                                XIX.

                                _z_.

_z_ in _buzz_, _fuzz_, _fuzzy_, _lazy_, _dizzy_, _zish_, _size_,
_sized_, _buzzing_, _buzzed_.

                                 XX.

                            _u_ (short).

 1. Separate _up_ into the elements _u_ (short) and _p_.

 2. Combine _i_ (short) with consonants to form the phonograms
 _ut_, _ud_, _ub_, _um_, _un_, _urr_, _uff_, _uss_, _uzz_.

 3. Word List:

        tub      fuss       cutting     shut         crust
        cup      buzz       buds        shutting     bump
        hug      fuzzy      syrup       shutter      bumping
        bug      push       supper      dug          pumped
        purr     pushed     hum         hundred      puff
        fur      pushing    humming     stuff        puffed
        dug      cut

                                XXI.

                             _u_ (long).

 1. Teach _u_ (long) in the same manner that _a_ (long) was taught.

 2. Combine different consonants and phonograms to illustrate this
 principle:

     tub      cub        plum        us        cut
     tube     cube       plume       use       cute

 3. Phonic List: _cure_, _pure_, _mute_, _amuse_, _use_, _used_,
 _tune_, _tube_.

                                XXII.

                         _ew_ = _u_ (long).

 1. _ew_ is an equivalent symbol for _u_ (long).

 2. _ew_ in _new_, _blew_, _few_, _view_, _dew_.

                               XXIII.

                         _ur_ = _er_, _ir_.

 _r_ following _u_, _e_, _i_, usually gives the sound heard in _fur_,
 _her_, _sir_.

 Word List:

                    _ur_        _er_        _ir_

                    fur         her         sir
                    burn        term        bird
                    curl        verse       girl
                    nurse       berth       first
                    church      dinner      third
                    hurt        supper      skirt

                                XXIV.

                    _er_; _ers_ (as a syllable).

Write the simple form on the blackboard, and have it pronounced.
Write it again with _er_ added, and have it pronounced. Write it
again with _ers_ added, and have it pronounced.

                    farm        farm er     farm ers
                    mill        mill er     mill ers
                    bake         bak er      bak ers
                    mine         min er      min ers

Identify _er_ in

                 other         father          butter
                 mother        sister          water
                 brother       flower          pitter-patter

                                XXV.

                      _ng_ (the ringing sound).

 1. _ng_ is one of the elementary sounds.

 2. Combine _ng_ with the vowels _a_, _e_, _i_, _o_, _u_, to form the
 phonograms _ang_, _eng_, _ing_, _ong_, _ung_.

 3. Word List:

            sing     wing      ding     along     length
            king     spring    dong     rang      strength
            sung     lungs     song     sang      rung
            sling    sting     long     hang      strung
            swing    string    gong     bang      stung

                                XXVI.

                            _qu_ = _kwh_.

_q_ is not one of the elementary sounds.

_qu_ in _quack_, _queer_, _queen_, _quite_, _quail_, _squeeze_, _squash_.

                               XXVII.

                     _oo_ (short); _oo_ (long).

 1. _oo_ (short) as in _cook_.

 Word List:

                    book                    took
                    good                    hook
                    look                    brook
                    wood                    cook
                    foot                    cooking

 2. _oo_ (long) as in _coo_.

 Word List:

                  moon     stoop     broom     root
                  room     moo       bloom     too
                  fool     cool      goose     tool
                  poor     loom      stool     soon
                  spool    noon      roof      spoon

                               XXVIII.

                         _aw_ = _all_, _or_.

 1. _aw_ in _caw_, _draw_, _saw_, _claw_, _paw_, _straw_.

 2. _all_ in _ball_, _hall_, _wall_, _fall_.

 3. _or_ in _corn_, _horn_, _morn_, _morning_, _torn_.

                                XXIX.

                          _a_ (r), Italian.

_ar_ in    arm      star    car      card     hard
           harm     barn    mark     sharp    starch
           park     yard    start    far      spark
           bark     march   jar      ark      lark

                                XXX.

                            _ow_ = _ou_.

 1. _ow_ and _ou_ are equivalent symbols for the same sound.

 2. _ou_ at the beginning or in the middle of a word becomes _ow_
 final.

 3. _ou_ in     our       sour       cloud       found
                mouse     out        ground      round
                around    loud       aloud       spout
                house     sound      about       flour

 4. _ow_ in     cow       how        now         bow
                owl       down       drown       brown
                crown     clown      crowd       growl

                                 XXXI.

                             _oy_ = _oi_.

 1. _oy_ and _oi_ are equivalent symbols for the same sound.

 2. _oi_ at the beginning or in the middle of a word becomes _oy_
 final.

 3. _oi_ in     oil       boil       coin        join
                joint     point      voice       toil
                spoil     noise      soil        broil

 4. _oy_ in     _boy_, _toy_, _joy_, _Roy_, _Troy_, _ahoy_.

                                XXXII.

                       _j_; _ge_; _dge_ (final).

 1. _-ge_, _dge_, are equivalent symbols for _j_.

 2. _-ge_  in  _age_, _hinge_, _cage_, _page_, _sponge_, _fringe_.

 3. _-dge_ in  _edge_, _bridge_, _judge_, _Madge_.

                               XXXIII.

                              SUMMARY.

=Phonic Lessons.= Third Step contains:

 1. 17 vowel sounds:

             a, e, i, o, u (short)
             a, e, i, o, u (long)
             oo (short), oo (long), a (r), (Italian)
             aw, ow, oy, ur.

 2. Nine of these sounds have fifteen common equivalent symbols,
 making a total of thirty-two vowel symbols. (See Table of Vowel
 Sounds, page 113.)

The three vowel sounds heard in _ask_, _air_, and _ore_ may be
omitted. Teach as sight words those used in the Summers
Readers; or if preferred, give a series drill.

Two of these sounds have equivalent spellings.

        _air_ in _chair_, _care_, _wear_.
        _ore_ as in _more_, _four_, _floor_, _torn_.

The sound _ask_ has the simple spelling _a_. In this Manual _a_
is the symbol for _a_ (short) as in _at_ unless changed by some
modifier as _final_, _r_, or another vowel. _Ex.:_ _at_, _aw_, _oa_,
_ea_. _Ex.:_ The following list gives the most common of these words:

                                 I.

                       _air_    _are_    _ear_

                       chair    care     bear
                       fair     bare     tear
                       hair     dare     wear
                       pair     fare     pear
                       stair    scare

                                 II.

              _ore_    _oor_    _orn_    _oar_    _our_

              bore     door     torn     roar     four
              core     floor    worn     soar     pour
              more              thorn
              shore             born
              store

                                III.

                      _ask_    _ast_    _ance_

                       task     fast     dance
                       mask     last     lance
                       basket   mast     chance





                               PART V.

                          THIRD HALF YEAR:
                            FOURTH STEP.


 1. Reading from the Second Reader.

 2. Phonic Lessons:

         (a) Initial and final syllables taught as
         phonograms.

         (b) Word Drill.

 3. Later Work.


                    INITIAL AND FINAL SYLLABLES.

                     (Time, about twenty weeks.)

=Directions.= 1. In the third half-year initial and final syllables
are taught as phonograms. This enables the child to read words
requiring an understanding of syllabication.

2. The familiar consonant and vowel sounds previously learned are
constantly reviewed in the word lists given for phonic drill. These
are based largely upon the words used in the Primer, the First
Reader, and the Second Reader. The list may be increased by using, in
connection with familiar words, the prefixes and suffixes given in
the following lessons.

3. New sight words which the child may meet in any reader should be
told him.

                                 I.

                          _y_        _ies_
                        par ty      par ties
                       coun try    coun tries
                        sto ry      sto ries
                        car ry      car ries
                        cher ry     cher ries
                        ber ry      ber ries
                        fai ry      fai ries
                        brow ny     brow nies
                        pen ny      pen nies
                        pup py      pup pies

                                 II.

                  _ly_                        _ful_
        near   ly        ug ly        play ful    won der ful
        nice   ly       sad ly       thank ful      truth ful
        mere   ly       hol ly     beau ti ful       barn ful
        friend ly    mer ri ly        help ful      field ful
        quick  ly    hap pi ly         use ful       hand ful

                                III.

                          _ure_       _age_

                        pict ure     vil lage
                        mixt ure     mes sage
                        fig ure     cab bage
                        past ure     man  age
                        rapt ure    pack  age
                       creat ure     cot tage

                                 IV.

                _le_                _ous_        _tion_

           cas tle     gen tle    won drous     ques tion
           cat tle      un cle     fa  mous       mo tion
           nee dle    bram ble    joy   ous      sta tion
          trem ble    shut tle    gor geous       ac tion
          wres tle    trea dle                va ca  tion
                        ap ple

                                 V.

               _in_                _en_      _il_, _el_

               in side        chick en         an vil
               in vite          sev en        pen cil
               in deed         soft en       trav  el
               in ven tion    sweet en        cam  el
               In di an         wak en       quar rel
           rob in                   en joy
       Mon da min

                                 VI.

                           _ed_         _est_

                         end ed     near  est
                       faint ed      old  est
                       plant ed    young  est
                        lift ed      har vest
                        fold ed       mo lest
                        mend ed     sick  est
                        card ed     dark  est

                                VII.

                _a_         _be_  _de_      _re_  _pre_

                 a side      be come         re cess
                 a sleep     be came         re ceive
                 a wake      be fore         re ply
                 a long      be gan          re ply ing
                 a fraid     be gin ning    pre pare
                 a live      be long        pre tend
                 a cross     be side        pre tend ing
                 a go        be hind
                 a gainst    de lay
                 a gain      de lay ing
                 a round     de light
                             de light ful

                                VIII.

               _dis mis_       _ex_             _pro_

               dis turb      ex plain         pro nounce
               mis take      ex plain ing     pro long
               mis tak en    ex pect
                             ex pect ed
                             ex cuse
                             ex press
                             ex am ple
                             ex treme ly

                                 IX.

              _ap_           _ad_            _af_

               ap pear        ad mit          af fec tion
               ap pear ing    ad mit ting     af ter
                              ad mit ted
                              ad mit tance
                              ad dress
                              ad di tion

                                 X.

                     _at_               _an ab_

                      at tic             an i mal
                      at tract       wom an
                      at tend            ab sent
                      at ten tion

                                 XI.

          _ness_                        _less_       _some_

      cold ness       weak ness        end less         some times
       ill ness       sick ness       help less         some thing
      lame ness    wil der ness       home less    lone some
      like ness       fear less    moth er less    hand some
      near ness     friend less    fath er less     win some

                                XII.

          _ob_              _or_                  _ph = f_

           ob tain      par lor                    Phil ip
           ob tains     mir ror               el e phant
           ob tained         or gan     pho to gra ph
           ob tain ing       or chard            s phere

                                XIII.

                              SUMMARY.

                 y     ies     ly      ful      ure
                 age   le      ous     tion     in
                 en    il      el      ed       est
                 a     be      de      re       pre
                 dis   mis     ex      ap       ad
                 af    at      an      ab       ob
                 ness  less    some    or       ph = f


                    SUPPLEMENTARY LIST OF POEMS.

The teacher may read the following poems to the children in
connection with the reading lessons in the Second Reader.

                             SEPTEMBER.

"September," by Helen Hunt Jackson. _Book: Jackson's Poems._
"Hiawatha's Childhood," by Henry W. Longfellow. _Book: Longfellow's
 Poems._

    Lines beginning: "By the shores of Gitchee Gumee" to
    "called them 'Hiawatha's Brother's.'"

Selections from Hiawatha's Fasting.

    The first day of his fasting.

    The fourth day of his fasting, lines beginning: "To-morrow
    is the last day of your fasting."

    The seventh day of his fasting, lines beginning: "Day by
    day did Hiawatha."

"The Little Elf," by John Kendrick Bangs.

        _Book: "The Posy Ring," (Selections) Wiggin &
        Smith (Eds.)._

                              OCTOBER.

"The Mountain and the Squirrel," by Ralph Waldo Emerson.

        _Book: Emerson's Poems._

"Robin Redbreast," by William Allingham.

        _Book: "The Posy Ring."_

"Lullaby of the Iroquois," by E. Pauline Johnson.

        _Book: "Songs of the Tree-Top and Meadow," (Selections)
        McMurry and Cook (Eds.)._

"Hiawatha's Sailing," by Henry W. Longfellow.

        _Book: Longfellow's Poems._

                              NOVEMBER.

"The Story of a Seed," from _The Youth's Companion._

        _Book: "Songs of the Tree-Top and Meadow."_

"Little Red Riding Hood," by John G. Whittier.

        _Book: Whittier's Poems._

"Selections from the Barefoot Boy," by John G. Whittier.

        _Book: Whittier's Poems._

"The Boy and the Sheep," by Ann Taylor.

        _Book: "The Posy Ring."_

                              DECEMBER.

"Little Fir Trees," by Evaleen Stein.

        _Book: "St. Nicholas."_

"Why do Bells for Christmas Ring?" by Eugene Field.

        _Book: "Lullaby Land."_

"The Sugar-Plum Tree," by Eugene Field.

        _Book: "Lullaby Land."_

"A Visit from St. Nicholas," by Clement C. Moore.

        _Book: "Child Life," (Selections) John G. Whittier
        (Ed.)._

                              JANUARY.

"What the Wood Fire Said to the Little Boy," by Frank L. Stanton.

        _Book: "Songs of the Tree-Top and Meadow."_

"The Snow," from _The Youth's Companion._

        _Book: "Songs of the Tree-Top and Meadow."_

"The Frost," by Hannah F. Gould.

        _Book: "The Posy Ring."_

"Talking in Their Sleep," by Edith M. Thomas.

        _Book: "Songs of the Tree-Top and Meadow."_

                              FEBRUARY.

"The Village Blacksmith," by Henry W. Longfellow.

        _Book: Longfellow's Poems._

"From My Arm Chair," by Henry W. Longfellow.

        _Book: Longfellow's Poems._

"The Children's Hour," by Henry W. Longfellow.

        _Book: Longfellow's Poems._

"Time to Rise"; "Bed in Summer," by Robert Louis Stevenson.

        _Book: "A Child's Garden of Verses."_

                               MARCH.

"The Windmill," by Henry W. Longfellow.

        _Book: Longfellow's Poems._

"The Wind," by Robert Louis Stevenson.

        _Book: "A Child's Garden of Verses."_

"My Shadow," by Robert Louis Stevenson.

        _Book: "A Child's Garden of Verses."_

"The Lost Doll," by Charles Kingsley.

        _Book: "The Posy Ring."_

                               APRIL.

"The Brown Thrush," by Lucy Larcom.

        _Book: "Childhood Songs."_

"Wild Geese," by Celia Thaxter.

        _Book: "Poems for Children."_

"The Song of the Lilies," by Lucy Wheelock.

        _Book: "Songs of the Tree-Top and Meadow."_

"What is Pink?" by Christina G. Rossetti.

        _Book: "Sing-Song."_

                                MAY.

"Baby Seed Song," by E. Nesbit.

        _Book: "The Posy Ring."_

"Calling the Violet," by Lucy Larcom.

        _Book: "Childhood Songs."_

"The Bluebird," by Emily Huntington Miller.

        _Book: "The Posy Ring."_

"Spring," by Celia Thaxter.

        _Book: "Poems for Children."_

                                JUNE.

"Mabel on Midsummer Day," by Mary Howitt.

"The Fairies of the Caldron-Low," by Mary Howitt.

"The Fairy Folk," by Robert Bird.

        _Book: "The Posy Ring."_

"Seven Times One," by Jean Bigelow.

        _Book: "The Posy Ring."_

                                JULY.

"Flag Song," by Mrs. Coonley-Ward.

        _Book: "Wilson's History Reader."_

"Independence Bell." (Author unknown.)

        _Book: "Williams's Choice Literature, Book II."_

"The Flag Goes By," from _The Youth's Companion._

        _Book: "Songs of the Tree-Top and Meadow."_

"The Star-Spangled Banner," by Francis Scott Key.

        _Book: "Williams's Choice Literature, Book II."_

                               AUGUST.

"The Song of the Crickets," by Emily Huntington Miller.

        _Book: "Songs of the Tree-Top and Meadow."_

"The Spider and the Fly," by Mary Howitt.

        _Book: "Songs of the Tree-Top and Meadow."_

"Wynken, Blynken and Nod," by Eugene Field.

        _Book: "Lullaby Land."_

"Old Gaelic Lullaby." (Author unknown.)

        _Book: "The Posy Ring."_

                             LATER WORK.

After the third half year any series of readers may be used. The
literature of childhood, carefully selected and edited, should form
the subject-matter of these reading books.

Phonic lessons based as far as possible upon the words found in the
readers should be practised daily during the first three years. This
later work does not differ from that of the preceding phonic lessons.




                          CONSONANT SOUNDS.


               +BREATH SOUNDS.+       +VOCAL SOUNDS.+

                    h-
                    wh               w-
                    p                b     m
                    t                d     n     l    r-
                    k                g     ng
                    f                v
                    th               th
                    s                z
                    sh               zh
                    ch               j     y-
                {qu = kwh}
                {x  = ks }

                       +EQUIVALENT SPELLINGS.+

              c    = k cat              ge  } = j age
              ce }     cent             dge }     bridge
              ci } = s city             ph    = f elephant
              cy }     bicycle          s     = z is, has

Based on Chart of Consonant Sounds used in Clarke School,
Northampton, Mass.

 1. Two consonant sounds may be omitted from the phonic
 work in the primary grades.

     (_a_) Omit the breath sound of _th_ as in _thin_, _thick_,
 _thank_, since the vocal sound as in _this_, _then_, _they_ is more
 often in the child's vocabulary. It will be confusing to have two
 sounds for the same symbol.

     (_b_) The _zh_ sound as heard in _pleasure_, _measure_,
 _treasure_, does not occur in the Summers Readers and therefore is
 omitted. Let the symbol _s_ at first represent the breath sound as
 in _sit_.

 2.   _p_, _b_, and _m_ are in a horizontal line indicating that
 all are made by the same organs of speech.

      _t_, _d_, _n_, _l_, _r_, all have the point of the tongue as the
 active organ and the upper gum as the passive organ in articulation.

      _q_ and _x_ are not elementary sounds. They are double breath
 consonants. qu = kwh. x = ks.




                            VOWEL SOUNDS.


        Short     a     at              Short      o     hop
        Long      a-e   ate             Long       o-e   hope
        Italian   a(r)  arm             Short      oo    foot
                  aw    saw             Long       oo    food
                  air   fair                       ow    cow
                  a     ask                        oy    boy
        Short     e     bed                        ore   more
        Long      ee    bee             Short      u     us
        Short     i     pin             Long       u-e   use
        Long      i-e   pine                       ur    fur

                    COMMON EQUIVALENT SPELLINGS.

                a-e = ay, ai             day,   train
                ee  = ea, -e             each,  me
                i-e = -y, igh            my,    high
                o-e = -o, oa             so,    coat
                u-e = ew                 new,   view
                aw  = all, or            call,  corn
                ow  = ou                 out,   found
                oy  = oi                 boil
                ur  = er, ir             her,   sir

Three vowel sounds may be omitted from the phonic work in the
primary grades. The sounds in _ask_, _fair_, and _more_ should be
used with accuracy by the teacher, since the child is at the most
imitative and impressionable stage. In the early phonic work it will
confuse the child if he is taught two sounds for the same symbol. In
this Manual the symbol _a_ means invariably _a_ (short) as in _cat_,
therefore such words as _ask_, _chance_, _after_ are taught through
the series idea. _Fair_, _hair_, _bore_, _more_ are taught in the
same manner.


[Illustration: publisher-logo]
[Illustration: back-cover]

*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE SUMMERS READERS ***

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the
United States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following
the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use
of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for
copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very
easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation
of derivative works, reports, performances and research. Project
Gutenberg eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may
do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected
by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark
license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country other than the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where
  you are located before using this eBook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that:

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of
the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Foundation as set
forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org

Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West,
Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up
to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website
and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without
widespread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our website which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This website includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
